@c Copyright (C) 1999 Kazuhisa Ichikawa
@c This is part of the Flex manual, as published by ASCII
@ignore
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ignore

@c @node Switches Summary (Flex 2.5), Summary or Flex Variables and Functions, Switches Summary, Summary
@c @section Flexコマンドライン・オプションの要約（Flex 2.5の補足情報）
@cindex Flexコマンドライン・オプション（Flex 2.5補足）

Flex 2.5では、
前節（@ref{Switches Summary}）で説明されていない、
以下のオプションもサポートされています。

@itemize
@table @kbd
@vindex @kbd{-h}
@item -h
Flexに対してコマンドライン・オプションの要約情報を出力するよう指示します。

@vindex @kbd{-l}
@item -l
AT&Tにより実装されたlexとの互換性を最大限に提供します。
このオプションは、
性能面でかなりの悪影響を及ぼします。
また、
このオプションを、
@samp{-f}、@samp{-F}、@samp{-Cf}、@samp{-CF}、@samp{-+}オプションと同時に指定することはできません。

@vindex @kbd{-w}
@item -w
このオプションが指定されると、
Flexは、
警告メッセージを出力しません。

@vindex @kbd{-B}
@item -B
Flexに対してバッチ・スキャナを生成するよう指示します。
これは、
対話型スキャナを生成するよう指示する@samp{-I}オプションの否定です。

@vindex @kbd{-V}
@item -V
Flexに対してバージョン番号を出力するよう指示します。

@vindex @kbd{-7}
@item -7
Flexに対して7ビット・スキャナを生成するよう指示します。
これは、
@samp{-8}オプションの否定です。

@vindex @kbd{-+}
@item -+
Flexに対してC++スキャナ・クラスを生成するよう指示します。

@vindex @kbd{-?}
@item -?
Flexに対してコマンドライン・オプションの要約情報を出力するよう指示します。
（@samp{-h}オプションと同じです）。

@vindex @kbd{-Ca}
@item -Ca
このオプションは、
スキャン処理用のテーブルを@code{long int}の配列として定義するようFlexに通知します
（デフォルトでは@code{short int}型の配列となります）。

@vindex @kbd{-Cr}
@item -Cr
このオプションを指定して生成されたスキャナは、
入力に@code{read()}システム・コールを使います。
デフォルトでは、
対話型スキャナの場合は@code{getc()}が、
バッチ（非対話型）・スキャナの場合は@code{fread()}が使われます。

@vindex @kbd{-o}
@item -o@var{file}
このオプションが指定されると、
Flexは生成されたスキャナを@var{file}により指定されるファイルに出力します。
デフォルトでは、
スキャナはファイル@file{lex.yy.c}に出力されます。

@vindex @kbd{-P}
@item -P@var{prefix}
Flexにより生成されるスキャナのソース・ファイルの中では、
大域変数や大域関数の名前の先頭に接頭辞@samp{yy}が付けられます。
このオプションが指定されると、
@samp{yy}の代わりに、
@var{prefix}により指定される文字列が接頭辞として使用されます。
また、
@samp{-o}オプションが指定されない場合のスキャナ・ファイル名@file{lex.yy.c}も、
@file{lex.@var{prefix}.c}となります。

@vindex @kbd{--help}
@item --help
Flexに対してコマンドライン・オプションの要約情報を出力するよう指示します。
（@samp{-h}オプションと同じです）。

@vindex @kbd{--version}
@item --version
Flexに対してバージョン番号を出力するよう指示します。
（@samp{-V}オプションと同じです）。
@end table
@end itemize
