.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jul  4 17:20:13 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_FSYNC 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
aio_fsync \- 非同期ファイルを同期させる
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "int aio_fsync(int " op ", struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR aio_fsync ()
関数は、
.I aiocbp\->aio_fildes
で関連付けられているまだ完了していない全ての非同期 I/O 操作を同期させる。
.LP
より正確に言うと、
.I op
が
.B O_SYNC
の場合、現在キューに入れられている全ての I/O 操作は、
.BR fsync (2)
が呼ばれたかのように完了されるだろう。
また
.I op
が
.B O_DSYNC
の場合、この呼び出しは
.BR fdatasync (2)
の非同期版となる。
この関数はリクエストを行うだけである点に注意すること \(em
この呼び出しは I/O の完了を待たない。
.LP
.I aiocbp
で指される構造体のフィールドのうち、この呼び出しで
.I aio_fildes
以外に使用されるのは
.I aio_sigevent
フィールド (\fIstruct sigevent\fP) のみである。
このフィールドは、完了時の非同期通知に使用したいタイプを示す。
その他のフィールドは無視される。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合 (同期リクエストをキューに入れるのに成功した場合)、
この関数は 0 を返す。
エラーの場合、\-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EAGAIN
リソースが足りない。
.TP
.B EBADF
.I aio_fildes
が書き込みのためにオープンされた有効なファイルディスクリプタではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
このファイルに対する同期 I/O がサポートされていない。
または
.I op
が
.B O_SYNC
でも
.B O_DSYNC
でもない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_cancel (3),
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_return (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
