.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jul  9 05:07:19 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_RETURN 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
aio_return \- 非同期 I/O 操作の返り値 (return status) を取得する
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "ssize_t aio_return(struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR aio_return ()
関数は
.I aiocbp
で指された制御ブロックにおける非同期 I/O リクエストの最終的な返り値を返す。
.LP
この関数は、
.BR aio_error (3)
が
.B EINPROGRESS
以外を返した後で、
与えられたリクエストに対して 1 回だけ呼ばれるべきである。
.SH 返り値
非同期 I/O 操作が完了した場合、この関数は同期
.IR read ,
.IR write ,
.I fsync
リクエストのときに返されるのと同じ値を返す。
それ以外の場合、返り値は未定義である。
エラーの場合、エラー値が返される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I aiocbp
が、返り値がまだ取得されていない非同期 I/O リクエストの
制御ブロックを指していない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_cancel (3),
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
