.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jul  3 05:28:09 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_ERROR 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
aio_error \- 非同期 I/O 操作のエラー状態を取得する
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "int aio_error(const struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR aio_error ()
関数は
.I aiocbp
で指された制御ブロックでの非同期 I/O リクエストのエラー状態を返す。
.SH 返り値
リクエストがまだ完了していない場合、この関数は
.B EINPROGRESS
を返す。リクエストがキャンセルされた場合、この関数は
.B ECANCELED
を返す。リクエストが成功して完了した場合、この関数は 0 を返す。
それ以外の場合はエラー値が返される。
このエラー値は、同期
.IR read ,
.IR write ,
.IR fsync ,
.I fdatasync
リクエストの場合に
.I errno
に格納されるのと同じ値である。
エラーの場合はエラー値が返される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I aiocbp
が、まだ返り値 (return status)
.RB ( aio_return (3)
を参照) が取得されていない非同期 I/O リクエストの制御ブロックを指していない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_cancel (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_return (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
