.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jul 01 02:44:30 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_CANCEL 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
aio_cancel \- 完了していない非同期 I/O リクエストをキャンセルする
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "int aio_cancel(int " fd ", struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR aio_cancel ()
関数は、ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
についての完了していない非同期 I/O リクエストをキャンセルしようとする。
.I aiocbp
が NULL の場合、そのような全てのリクエストがキャンセルされる。
.I aiocbp
が NULL でない場合、
.I aiocbp
で指された制御ブロックで記述されたリクエストのみがキャンセルされる。
.LP
キャンセルされたリクエストに対して、通常の非同期通知が起こる。
リクエストの返り値は \-1 に設定され、
リクエストのエラー状態は
.B ECANCELED
に設定される。
キャンセルできなかったリクエストの制御ブロックは変更されない。
.LP
.I aiocbp
が NULL でなく、かつ
.I fd
が非同期操作が開始されたファイルディスクリプタと異なる場合、
生じる結果は不定である。
.LP
どの操作をキャンセルできるかは、実装定義である。
.\" FreeBSD: raw ディスクデバイスへのリクエストはキャンセルできない。
.SH 返り値
全てのリクエストのキャンセルが成功した場合、この関数は
.B AIO_CANCELED
を返す。
指定されたリクエストのうち少なくとも 1 つが進行中であるために
キャンセルできなかった場合は、
.B AIO_NOTCANCELED
が返される。
この場合は、
.BR aio_error (3)
を使って個々のリクエストの状態をチェックすることができる。
呼び出される前に全てのリクエストが完了していた場合、
この関数は
.B AIO_ALLDONE
を返す。
何らかのエラーが起こった場合は、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタでない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_return (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
