.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 17:58:16 JST
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\" Proof Reading: Takashi Yoshino
.\" Updated Tue Aug  5 23:16:48 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-14, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ATANH 3  2010-09-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
atanh, atanhf, atanhl \- 逆双曲線正接（inverse hyperbolic tangent）関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double atanh(double " x );
.br
.BI "float atanhf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double atanhl(long double " x );
.sp
.fi
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR atanh ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR atanhf (),
.BR atanhl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
.BR atanh ()
関数は \fIx\fP の逆双曲線正接 (inverse hyperbolic tangent) を計算する。
すなわち、その双曲線正接 (hyperbolic tangent) が \fIx\fP になる
ような値である。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の逆双曲線正接を返す。

.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.I x
が +0 (\-0) の場合、+0 (\-0) が返される。

.I x
が +1 か \-1 の場合、
極エラー (pole error) が発生し、
関数の種類に応じて、数学的に正しい符号の
.BR HUGE_VAL ,
.BR HUGE_VALF ,
.BR HUGE_VALL
がそれぞれ返される。

.I x
の絶対値が 1 より大きい場合、
領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、
NaN が返される。
.\"
.\" POSIX.1-2001 documents an optional range error for subnormal x;
.\" glibc 2.8 does not do this.
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
領域エラー (domain error): \fIx\fP が \-1 より小さいか +1 より大きい
.I errno
に
.B EDOM
が設定される。
無効 (invalid) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_INVALID )
が上がる。
.TP
極エラー (pole error): \fIx\fP が +1 か \-1
.I errno
に
.B ERANGE
が設定される (但し「バグ」の節も参照)。
0 による除算 (divide-by-zero) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_DIVBYZERO )
が上がる。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.SH バグ
.\" Bug: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6759
.\" This can be seen in sysdeps/ieee754/k_standard.c
glibc 2.9 とそれ以前のバージョンでは、
極エラーが発生した場合、POSIX で要求されている
.B ERANGE
ではなく
.B EDOM
が
.I errno
に設定される。
バージョン 2.10 以降の glibc では、正しい動作をする。
.SH 関連項目
.BR acosh (3),
.BR asinh (3),
.BR catanh (3),
.BR cosh (3),
.BR sinh (3),
.BR tanh (3)
