.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Mon Mar 29 22:39:41 1993, David Metcalfe
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:38:42 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Dec 17 18:35:06 2000, Joseph S. Myers
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kentaro OGAWA
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 22:47:32 +0900
.\"         by Kentaro OGAWA <k_ogawa@oyna.cc.muroran-it.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 30 Jan 2001 JST by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH ATOI 3  2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
atoi, atol, atoll, atoq \- 文字列を整数型に変換する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "int atoi(const char *" nptr );
.br
.BI "long atol(const char *" nptr );
.br
.BI "long long atoll(const char *" nptr );
.br
.BI "long long atoq(const char *" nptr );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR atoll ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
.BR atoi ()
関数は、\fInptr\fP によって指示される文字列のはじめの部分を
.I int
型整数に変換する。
この振る舞いは、
.BR atoi ()
関数がエラーを見つけない点以外は、
.sp
.in +4n
strtol(nptr, (char **) NULL, 10);
.in
.sp
と同じである。
.PP
.BR atol ()
関数と
.BR atoll ()
関数は
.BR atoi ()
と同様の振る舞いをするが、
文字列のはじめの部分をそれぞれ \fIlong\fP や \fIlong long\fP に変換する。
.BR atoq ()
は
.BR atoll ()
の古い名前である。
.SH 返り値
変換された値。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001, 4.3BSD, C99.
C89 と POSIX.1-1996 には
.BR atoi ()
と
.BR atol ()
だけが含まれている。
.BR atoq ()
は GNU による拡張である。
.SH 注意
非標準である
.BR atoq ()
関数は libc 4.6.27 や glibc 2 には含まれていないが、
libc5 と libc 4.7 には存在している (ただし libc 5.4.44 までは
\fI<stdlib.h>\fP のインライン関数のみである)。
.BR atoll ()
関数は glibc 2 のバージョン 2.0.2 から存在しているが、
libc4 や libc5 には存在しない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR atof (3),
.BR strtod (3),
.BR strtol (3),
.BR strtoul (3)
