.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 20:17:40 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Aug  5 23:16:48 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 15 04:46:24 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	complementary error function	相補誤差関数
.\"WORD:	subnormal	非正規化の
.\"
.TH ERF 3  2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
erf, erff, erfl \- 誤差関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>

.BI "double erf(double " x );
.BI "float erff(float " x );
.BI "long double erfl(long double " x );

.fi
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR erf ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR erff (),
.BR erfl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
.BR erf ()
は \fIx\fP の誤差関数を返す関数で、以下のように定義されている。
.TP
    erf(x) = 2/sqrt(pi)* integral from 0 to x of exp(\-t*t) dt
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の誤差関数を返す。
返り値は [\-1,\ 1] の範囲となる。

.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.I x
が +0 (\-0) の場合、+0 (\-0) が返される。

.I x
が正の無限大 (負の無限大) の場合、+1 (\-1) が返される。

.I x
が非正規化数の場合、範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、
返り値は 2*x/sqrt(pi) となる。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
範囲エラー (range error): 結果がアンダーフローする (\fIx\fP が非正規化数)
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR ERANGE .
アンダーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_UNDERFLOW )
が上がる。
.PP
これらの関数は
.I errno
を設定しない。
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not set errno?
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6785
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD にも準拠している。
.SH 関連項目
.BR cerf (3),
.BR erfc (3),
.BR exp (3)
