.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2002 Ian Redfern (redferni@logica.com)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     FreeBSD 4.4 man pages
.\"
.\" Minor additions, aeb, 2002-07-20
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 22 2002 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ETHER_ATON 3  2002-07-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ether_aton, ether_ntoa, ether_ntohost, ether_hostton, ether_line,
ether_ntoa_r, ether_aton_r \- Ethernet アドレスの操作用関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <netinet/ether.h>
.sp
.BI "char *ether_ntoa(const struct ether_addr *" addr );
.sp
.BI "struct ether_addr *ether_aton(const char *" asc );
.sp
.BI "int ether_ntohost(char *" hostname ", const struct ether_addr *" addr );
.sp
.BI "int ether_hostton(const char *" hostname ", struct ether_addr *" addr );
.sp
.BI "int ether_line(const char *" line ", struct ether_addr *" addr ,
.BI "               char *" hostname );
.sp
/* GNU 拡張 */
.br
.BI "char *ether_ntoa_r(const struct ether_addr *" addr ", char *" buf );
.sp
.BI "struct ether_addr *ether_aton_r(const char *" asc ,
.BI "                                struct ether_addr *" addr );
.fi
.SH 説明
関数
.BR ether_aton ()
は、標準的な 16進数とコロンの形式で書かれた 48ビットの
Ethernet ホストアドレス \fIasc\fP を、ネットワークでのバイト順 (byte order)
のバイナリデータに変換し、静的に割り当てられたバッファに格納されたデータ
へのポインタを返す。このバッファは、これ以降の関数呼び出しで上書きされる。
アドレスが不正な場合、
.BR ether_aton ()
は NULL を返す。
.PP
関数
.BR ether_ntoa ()
は、ネットワークのバイト順で表された Ethernet
ホストアドレス \fIaddr\fP を、標準的な 16進数とコロンの形式の文字列に変換する。
但し、先頭の 0 は省略される。変換後の文字列は静的に割り当てられたバッファ
に格納されて返される。このバッファは、これ以降の関数呼び出しで上書きされる。
.PP
関数
.BR ether_ntohost ()
は、Ethernet アドレスに対応するホスト名を
.I /etc/ethers
を検索して割り当てる。対応するホスト名が見つからなかった場合は、
非 0 を返す。
.PP
関数
.BR ether_hostton ()
は、ホスト名に対応する Ethernet アドレスを
.I /etc/ethers
を検索して割り当てる。対応するホスト名が見つからなかった場合は、
非 0 を返す。
.PP
関数
.BR ether_line ()
は、
.I /etc/ethers
形式になった行を解析し、
アドレスとホスト名の組を返す
.RI ( /etc/ethers
形式は、Ethernet アドレス、ホスト名が空白文字 (whitespace)
で区切られた書式で、\(aq#\(aq 以降はコメントとみなされる)。
解析できなかった場合は、非 0 を返す。
.I hostname
で指定されたバッファは十分な長さが必要である。つまり、
.I line
と同じ長さでなければならない。
.PP
関数
.BR ether_ntoa_r ()
と
.BR ether_aton_r ()
は、
それぞれ
.BR ether_ntoa ()
と
.BR ether_aton ()
の
リエントラントでスレッドセーフなバージョンであり、
静的なバッファを使用しない。
.PP
\fIether_addr\fP 構造体は
.I <net/ethernet.h>
で次のように定義されている:
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
struct ether_addr {
    uint8_t ether_addr_octet[6];
}
.fi
.in
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD, SunOS.
.SH バグ
glibc 2.2.5 での
.BR ether_line ()
の実装はおかしい。
.SH 関連項目
.BR ethers (5)
