.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek and the American National Standards Committee X3,
.\" on Information Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)fclose.3	6.7 (Berkeley) 6/29/91
.\"
.\" Converted for Linux, Mon Nov 29 15:19:14 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\"
.\" Modified 2000-07-22 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 18:30:47 JST 1997
.\"       by Takashi Yoshino <tyoshino@eng.toyo.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Sep 25 01:58:44 JST 2000
.\"       by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Apr  3 20:49:00 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jan 10 08:08:29 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH FCLOSE 3  2009-02-23 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fclose \- ストリームを閉じる
.SH 書式
.B #include <stdio.h>
.sp
.BI "int fclose(FILE *" fp );
.SH 説明
.BR fclose ()
関数は
.I fp
で指されるストリームを (バッファリングされていた全ての出力データを
.BR fflush (3)
を用いて書き込んで) フラッシュし、
その基となるファイルディスクリプタをクローズする。
.SH 返り値
関数が正常に終了すると 0 が返される。
正常に終了しなかった場合には
.B EOF
が返され、
.I errno
がエラーを示すために設定される。
どちらの場合も、そのストリームに対する
.RB ( fclose ()
へのさらなる呼び出しを含む) それ以上のアクセスは
未定義の動作を生じさせる。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fp
の基となるファイルディスクリプタが不正である。
.\"  同じストリームに対して ANSI C stdio の操作と低レベルファイル操作を
.\"  取り混ぜて行わない限り、このエラーは起こらない。
.\"  このエラーを受け取ったのは、ストリームの低レベルファイルディスクリプタを、
.\"  close(fileno(fp)) などで、既にクローズしてしまったからに違いない。
.PP
.BR fclose ()
関数はこれ以外にも
.BR close (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR fflush (3)
のルーチンで失敗することがある。その場合は
.I errno
が、失敗したルーチンで設定された値に設定される。
.SH 準拠
C89, C99.
.SH 注意
.BR fclose ()
は C ライブラリで提供されたユーザー空間バッファをフラッシュするだけで
ある点に注意すること。
データを確実に物理的にディスクに記録するためには
カーネルバッファも
.RB ( sync (2)
や
.BR fsync (2)
を用いて) フラッシュしなければならない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR close (2),
.BR fcloseall (3),
.BR fflush (3),
.BR fopen (3),
.BR setbuf (3)
