.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:37:37 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Mon May 27 22:40:48 1996 by Martin Schulze (joey@linux.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-18, HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-08-01, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH FGETPWENT 3  2008-07-10 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fgetpwent \- パスワードファイルエントリの取り出し
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <pwd.h>
.sp
.BI "struct passwd *fgetpwent(FILE *" stream );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR fgetpwent ():
_SVID_SOURCE
.SH 説明
.BR fgetpwent ()
関数は、\fIstream\fP から得られた行を分解したフィールド
を含む構造体へのポインタを返す。
最初に呼び出された時には最初のエントリを返し、それ以降は
次のエントリを返す。
.I stream
で参照されるファイルは
.I /etc/passwd
と同じ形式でなければならない
.RB ( passwd (5)
参照)。
.PP
\fIpasswd\fP 構造体は、\fI<pwd.h>\fP で以下のように定義されている:
.sp
.nf
.in +4n
struct passwd {
    char   *pw_name;       /* ユーザ名 */
    char   *pw_passwd;     /* ユーザのパスワード */
    uid_t   pw_uid;        /* ユーザ ID */
    gid_t   pw_gid;        /* グループ ID */
    char   *pw_gecos;      /* 本名 */
    char   *pw_dir;        /* ホームディレクトリ */
    char   *pw_shell;      /* シェルプログラム */
};
.fi
.in
.SH 返り値
.BR fgetpwent ()
関数は、
.I passwd
構造体へのポインタを返す。
これ以上エントリが無いか、エラーが発生した場合は NULL を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.I passwd
構造体を割り当てるためのメモリが不十分。
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/passwd
パスワードデータベースファイル
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.SH 関連項目
.BR endpwent (3),
.BR fgetpwent_r (3),
.BR fopen (3),
.BR getpw (3),
.BR getpwent (3),
.BR getpwnam (3),
.BR getpwuid (3),
.BR putpwent (3),
.BR setpwent (3),
.BR passwd (5)
