.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:38:44 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-19, HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-08-01, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH FGETGRENT 3  2008-07-10 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fgetgrent \- グループファイルエントリの取り出し
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <grp.h>
.sp
.BI "struct group *fgetgrent(FILE *" stream );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR fgetgrent ():
_SVID_SOURCE
.SH 説明
.BR fgetgrent ()
関数は、
.I stream
で参照されるファイルから取り出したグループ情報
を含む構造体へのポインタを返す。最初に呼び出された時は
最初のエントリを返し、それ以降は、次のエントリを返す。
.I stream
で参照されるファイルは、
.I /etc/group
と同じ形式でなければならない
.RB ( group (5)
参照)。
.PP
\fIgroup\fP 構造体は、\fI<grp.h>\fP で以下のように定義されている:
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
struct group {
    char   *gr_name;        /* グループ名 */
    char   *gr_passwd;      /* グループのパスワード */
    gid_t   gr_gid;         /* グループ ID */
    char  **gr_mem;         /* グループのメンバ */
};
.fi
.in
.SH 返り値
.BR fgetgrent ()
関数は
.I group
構造体へのポインタを返す。
これ以上エントリが無いか、エラーが発生した場合は NULL を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.I group
構造体を割り当てるためのメモリが不十分。
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.SH 関連項目
.BR endgrent (3),
.BR fgetgrent_r (3),
.BR fopen (3),
.BR getgrent (3),
.BR getgrgid (3),
.BR getgrnam (3),
.BR putgrent (3),
.BR setgrent (3),
.BR group (5)
