.\" Copyright 2001 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\" and Copyright (c) 2008 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 18:35:18 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Jul  6 20:37:36 JST 2001
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jan 10 08:45:45 JST 2005
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	mantissa		仮数
.\"
.TH FLOOR 3  2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
floor, floorf, floorl \- 引き数を越えない最大の整数値
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double floor(double " x );
.br
.BI "float floorf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double floorl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR floorf (),
.BR floorl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
これらの関数は
.I x
より大きくない最大の整数値を返す。

例えば、
.I floor(0.5)
は 0.0 で、
.I floor(\-0.5)
は \-1.0 である。
.SH 返り値
これらの関数は
.I x
を越えない最小の整数値を返す。

\fIx\fP が整数、+0、\-0、NaN、無限大のいずれかの場合、
\fIx\fP そのものが返される。
.SH エラー
エラーは発生しない。
POSIX.1-2001 にはオーバーフローに対して範囲エラーが記載されている。
「注意」の節を参照。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.SH 注意
SUSv2 と POSIX.1-2001 にはオーバーフローに関する記述があり、
オーバーフローの場合には、
.I errno
を
.B ERANGE
に設定するか、
.B FE_OVERFLOW
例外を発生することとされている。
実際のところ、現行のマシンでは結果がオーバーフローを起こすことはないので、
このエラー処理は意味がない。
.\" The POSIX.1-2001 APPLICATION USAGE SECTION discusses this point.
(より正確に言うと、オーバーフローは指数部の最大値が
仮数部を表すビットの数より小さい場合にしか起こらない。
IEEE-754 規格の 32 ビットと 64 ビットの浮動小数では、
指数部の最大値はそれぞれ 128 と 1024 であり、
仮数部のビット数はそれぞれ 24 と 53 である。)
.SH 関連項目
.BR ceil (3),
.BR lrint (3),
.BR nearbyint (3),
.BR rint (3),
.BR round (3),
.BR trunc (3)
