.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:35:54 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Mon Oct 16 00:16:29 2000 following Joseph S. Myers
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-03-18, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified 1998-12-18, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-03-05, Akihiro MOTOKI, catch up to LDP v2.25
.\"
.TH FNMATCH 3  2000-10-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fnmatch \- ファイル名またはパス名へのマッチを行う
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <fnmatch.h>
.sp
.BI "int fnmatch(const char *" "pattern" ", const char *" string ", int " flags );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR fnmatch ()
関数は
.I strings
引き数が
.I pattern
引き数にマッチするかをチェックする。
.I pattern
にはシェルのワイルドカードパターンを与える。
.PP
.I flags
引き数により動作を変更できる。
.I flags
は以下のフラグのビット毎の OR で指定する。
.TP
.B FNM_NOESCAPE
このフラグがセットされていると、バックスラッシュ (\\) をエスケープ文字
ではなく通常の文字として扱う。
.TP
.B FNM_PATHNAME
このフラグがセットされていると、
.I string
中のスラッシュ (/) を
.I pattern
にあるスラッシュそのものにだけマッチさせ、
アスタリスク (*) や疑問符 (?) のメタキャラクタや、
スラッシュを含むブラケット表現 ([]) にはマッチさせない。
.TP
.B FNM_PERIOD
このフラグがセットされていると、
.I string
の先頭ピリオド (leading period) は
.I pattern
中のピリオドそのものにしかマッチしない。先頭ピリオドとは、
.I string
の最初の文字位置にあるピリオドのことである。ただし
.B FNM_PATHNAME
フラグが同時にセットされている場合には、スラッシュの直後に続くピリオド
も先頭ピリオドとみなされる。
.TP
.B FNM_FILE_NAME
これは \fBFNM_PATHNAME\fR に対する GNU での同義語である.
.TP
.B FNM_LEADING_DIR
このフラグは GNU での拡張である。これがセットされている場合には、
パターンが
.I string
の最初の部分 (にスラッシュを付けたもの) にマッチすれば、
マッチしたものとみなされる。
このフラグは主として glibc で内部的に使用し、そのためのみ実装されている。
.TP
.B FNM_CASEFOLD
このフラグは GNU での拡張である。これがセットされている場合には、
パターンのマッチに大文字小文字が区別されない。
.SH 返り値
.I string
が
.I pattern
にマッチすれば 0 を返す。マッチしなかった場合には
.B FNM_NOMATCH
を返す。エラーの場合にはそれ以外の非ゼロ値を返す。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.2.
.BR FNM_FILE_NAME ", " FNM_LEADING_DIR ", " FNM_CASEFOLD
フラグは GNU の拡張である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR sh (1),
.BR glob (3),
.BR scandir (3),
.BR wordexp (3),
.BR glob (7)
