.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Aug 29 15:09:40 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Nov  2 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH FPUTWS 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fputws \- ワイド文字の文字列を FILE ストリームに書き込む
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int fputws(const wchar_t *" ws ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR fputws ()
関数は、
.BR fputs (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIws\fP から始まるワイド文字列を終端の L'\\0'
まで \fIstream\fP に書き出す。ただし終端の NULL ワイド文字
(L\(aq\\0\(aq) は含まれない。
.PP
これらの処理を停止せずに行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.SH 返り値
.BR fputws ()
は、操作が成功した時には負でない整数値を返す。エラーの時
には \-1 を返す。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
.BR fputws ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.PP
.BR fopen (3)
システムコールに渡す追加情報がない場合には、
.BR fputws ()
が実際
にはワイド文字の文字列である \fIws\fP に対応するマルチバイトシーケンス
を書き込むと期待することは適切である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR fputwc (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
