.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Inspired by a page by Walter Harms created 2002-08-10
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\" and Copyright (c) 2008 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\" Translated Sat Jan 29 05:17:36 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ILOGB 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ilogb, ilogbf, ilogbl \- 浮動小数点数の指数部を整数として取得する
.SH 書式
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "int ilogb(double " x );
.br
.BI "int ilogbf(float " x );
.br
.BI "int ilogbl(long double " x );
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR ilogb ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED ||
_ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR ilogbf (),
.BR ilogbl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
これらの関数は引き数の指数部を符号付き整数として返す。
エラーが起らなかった場合、これらの関数は、対応する
.BR logb (3)
関数を
.I int
でキャストしたものと等価である。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の指数部を符号付き整数として返す。

.\" the POSIX.1 spec for logb() says logb() gives pole error for this
.\" case, but for ilogb() it says domain error.
.\" glibc: The numeric value is either `INT_MIN' or `-INT_MAX'.
.I x
がゼロの場合、領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、
.B FP_ILOGB0
が返される。

.\" glibc: The numeric value is either `INT_MIN' or `INT_MAX'.
.\" On i386, FP_ILOGB0 and FP_ILOGBNAN have the same value.
.I x
が NaN の場合、領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、
.B FP_ILOGBNAN
が返される。

.I x
が負の無限大か正の無限大の場合、
領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、
.B INT_MAX
が返される。
.\"
.\" POSIX.1-2001 also says:
.\" If the correct value is greater than {INT_MAX}, {INT_MAX}
.\" shall be returned and a domain error shall occur.
.\"
.\" If the correct value is less than {INT_MIN}, {INT_MIN}
.\" shall be returned and a domain error shall occur.
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
領域エラー: \fIx\fP が 0 か NaN
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR EDOM .
不正 (invalid) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_INVALID )
が上がる。
.IP
これらの関数は、この状況で
.I errno
を設定しない。
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6794
.TP
領域エラー: \fIx\fP が無限大
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR EDOM .
.\" An invalid floating-point exception
.\" .RB ( FE_INVALID )
.\" is raised.
.IP
これらの関数は、この状況で
.I errno
を設定せず、例外も上げない。
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not set errno,
.\" or raise an exception?
.\" log(), log2(), log10() do set errno
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6794
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR log (3),
.BR logb (3),
.BR significand (3)
