.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Mon Apr 12 12:54:34 1993, David Metcalfe
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:13:52 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 12 12:41:35 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.TH INDEX 3 2011-09-21 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
index, rindex \- 文字列中の文字の位置を示す
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <strings.h>
.sp
.BI "char *index(const char *" s ", int " c );
.sp
.BI "char *rindex(const char *" s ", int " c );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR index ()
関数は、文字列 \fIs\fP 中に最初に文字 \fIc\fP が
現れた位置へのポインタを返す。
.PP
.BR rindex ()
関数は、文字列 \fIs\fP 中に最後に文字 \fIc\fP が
現れた位置へのポインタを返す。
.PP
文字列を終端する NULL バイト (\(aq\\0\(aq) は、文字列の一部とみなされる。
.SH 返り値
.BR index ()
と
.BR rindex ()
関数は、一致した文字へのポインタか、
もし文字が見つからない場合は NULL を返す。
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD;
POSIX.1-2001 では「過去の名残 (LEGACY)」と位置付けられている。
POSIX.1-2008 では
.BR index ()
と
.BR rindex ()
の仕様が削除されている。
代わりに、
.BR strchr (3)
と
.BR strrchr (3)
の使用が推奨されている。
.SH 関連項目
.BR memchr (3),
.BR strchr (3),
.BR string (3),
.BR strpbrk (3),
.BR strrchr (3),
.BR strsep (3),
.BR strspn (3),
.BR strstr (3),
.BR strtok (3)
