.\" peter memishian -- meem@gnu.ai.mit.edu
.\" $Id: insque.3,v 1.2 1996/10/30 21:03:39 meem Exp meem $
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   Linux libc source code (5.4.7)
.\"   Solaris 2.x, OSF/1, and HP-UX manpages
.\"   Curry's "UNIX Systems Programming for SVR4" (O'Reilly & Associates 1996)
.\"
.\" Changed to POSIX, 2003-08-11, aeb+wh
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 AKAMATSU Kazuo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jan 7 16:00 JST 1999
.\"         by AKAMATSU Kazuo
.\" Updated Sun Sep 14 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH INSQUE 3  2008-07-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
insque, remque \- キューにアイテムを挿入/削除する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <search.h>
.sp
.BI "void insque(void *" elem ", void *" prev );

.BI "void remque(void *" elem );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR insque (),
.BR remque ():
_SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.SH 説明
.BR insque ()
と
.BR remque ()
は双方向連結リスト (doubly-linked list) を操作する関数である。
リスト中のそれぞれの要素は、最初の二つの構造体要素が
次と前へのポインタであるような構造体である。

.BR insque ()
は \fIelem\fP で示される要素を \fIprev\fP で示される
要素の直後に挿入する。 \fIprev\fP は NULL であってはならない。

.BR remque ()
は \fIelem\fP で示される要素を双方向連結リストから取り除く。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
伝統的に (SunOS, Linux libc 4,5 では) これらの関数の引数は
\fIstruct qelem *\fP型であり、これは以下のように定義されている。

.in +4n
.nf
struct qelem {
    struct qelem *q_forw;
    struct qelem *q_back;
    char          q_data[1];
};
.fi
.in

この定義は \fI<search.h>\fP をインクルードする前に
.B _GNU_SOURCE
を定義することで得られる。

これらの関数のプロトタイプの置かれる場所は、Unix の種類により異なる。
上記は POSIX 版である。
\fI<string.h>\fP にあるシステムもある。
Linux libc4 と libc5 は \fI<stdlib.h>\fP にプロトタイプを置いている。
