.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Sep  4 21:22:34 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Dec 26 19:31:38 JST 1999
.\"           by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWGRAPH 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
iswgraph \- グラフィックワイド文字かどうかを調べる
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswgraph(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR iswgraph ()
関数は、
.BR isgraph (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "graph" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "space" と共通部分を持た
ない。したがって、そのサブクラスである "blank" とも共通部分を
持たない。
.\" Note: UNIX98 (susv2/xbd/locale.html) says that "graph" and "space" may
.\" have characters in common, except U+0020. But C99 (ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\" section 7.25.2.1.10) says that "space" and "graph" are disjoint.
.PP
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスであ
る。
.PP
ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "graph"
はワイド文字クラス "cntrl" とは共通部分を持たない。
.PP
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "print" に属する文字のう
ち空白文字を除く全てのワイド文字を含んでいる。したがって、
ワイド文字クラス "graph" にはワイド文字クラス "almun" と "punct" が含
まれる。
.SH 返り値
.BR iswgraph ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "graph" に属するワ
イド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.SH 準拠
C99.
.SH 注意
.BR iswgraph ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.SH 関連項目
.BR isgraph (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
