.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2004-10-31 by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 13 23:14:00 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jun  6 10:35:26 JST 2004
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 15 05:40:56 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated 2008-09-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH LDEXP 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ldexp, ldexpf, ldexpl \- 浮動小数点実数と 2 の整数乗との積を計算する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double ldexp(double " x ", int " exp );
.br
.BI "float ldexpf(float " x ", int " exp );
.br
.BI "long double ldexpl(long double " x ", int " exp );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR ldexpf (),
.BR ldexpl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
.BR ldexp ()
関数は、浮動小数点実数
.I x
と 2 の
.I exp
乗との積を返す。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I "x * (2^exp)"
を返す。

.I exp
がゼロの場合、
.I x
が返される。

.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.I x
が正の無限大 (負の無限大) の場合、
正の無限大 (負の無限大) が返される。

結果がアンダーフローする場合、
範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、ゼロが返される。

結果がオーバーフローする場合、範囲エラーが発生し、
各関数はそれぞれ
.BR HUGE_VAL ,
.BR HUGE_VALF ,
.B HUGE_VALL
を返す。返り値の符号は
.I x
と同じとなる。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
範囲エラー: 結果のオーバーフロー
.I errno
に
.B ERANGE
が設定される。
オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
が上がる。
.TP
範囲エラー: 結果のアンダーフロー
.I errno
に
.B ERANGE
が設定される。
アンダーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_UNDERFLOW )
が上がる。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.SH 関連項目
.BR frexp (3),
.BR modf (3),
.BR scalbln (3)
