.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:01:20 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue May 26 00:11:13 JST 1998
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@eng.toyo.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LOCALECONV 3  1993-04-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
localeconv \- 数値に関する書式情報を得る
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <locale.h>
.sp
.B struct lconv *localeconv(void);
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR localeconv ()
関数は、現在のロケール情報を表す
.I struct lconv
へのポインタを返す。
この構造体は
.BR locale (7)
で説明されており、ロケール・カテゴリ
.B LC_NUMERIC
と
.B LC_MONETARY
に関連するすべての値を含んでいる。
この関数を用いるプログラムは、おそらく同時に
.BR printf (3)
や
.BR strfmon (3)
のような関数も用いるだろう。
これらの関数は、現在使用されているロケールに従った動作をする。
.SH 準拠
C89, C99
.SH バグ
.BR printf (3)
グループの関数は現在のロケールを反映するかもしれないし、
しないかもしれない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR locale (1),
.BR localedef (1),
.BR isalpha (3),
.BR nl_langinfo (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR strcoll (3),
.BR strftime (3),
.BR locale (7)
