.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Inspired by a page by Walter Harms created 2002-08-10
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jan 29 06:47:42 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	exponent	指数部
.\"WORD:	radix	基数
.\"WORD:	subnormal	非正規化の
.\"
.TH LOGB 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
logb, logbf, logbl \- 浮動小数点数の指数を取得する
.SH 書式
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double logb(double " x );
.br
.BI "float logbf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double logbl(long double " x );
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR logb ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR logbf (),
.BR logbl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
これらの関数は、
.I x
の浮動小数点の内部表現から指数部を抽出し、浮動小数点数値として返す。
.I <float.h>
で定義されている整数定数
.B FLT_RADIX
は、システムの浮動小数点表現で使用されている基数を表す。
.B FLT_RADIX
が 2 の場合、
.BI logb( x )
は
.BI floor(log2( x ))\fR
と等しいが、後者の方がたぶん高速である。
.LP
.I x
が非正規化数の場合、
.BR logb ()
は
.I x
が正規化された場合の指数を返す。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の指数部を返す。

.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.I x
が 0 の場合、極エラー (pole error) が発生し、
各関数はそれぞれ
.RB - HUGE_VAL ,
.RB - HUGE_VALF ,
.RB - HUGE_VALL
を返す。

.I x
が負の無限大か正の無限大の場合、正の無限大が返される。
.\" .SH 返り値
.\" これらの関数は引き数の指数部を返す。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
極エラー (pole error): \fIx\fP が 0 である
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR ERANGE .
0 による除算 (divide-by-zero) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_DIVBYZERO )
が上がる。
.PP
これらの関数は
.I errno
を設定しない。
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not set errno?
.\" log(), log2(), log10() do set errno
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6793
.\"
.\" .SH 履歴
.\" .BR logb ()
.\" 関数は 4.3BSD で導入された。
.\" 4.3BSD マニュアルの IEEE.3 を参照すること。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR ilogb (3),
.BR log (3)
