.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:57:24 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 21 0:48:30 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <ueyama@campusnet.or.jp>
.TH MEMCCPY 3  1993-04-10 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
memccpy \- メモリ領域をコピーする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "void *memccpy(void *" dest ", const void *" src ", int " c ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR memccpy ()
は、メモリ領域 \fIsrc\fP からメモリ領域 \fIdest\fP に
最大で \fIn\fP バイトのコピーを行う。
\fIn\fP バイトコピーする前に文字 \fIc\fP が見つかると、
そこでコピーを中止する。

コピー元とコピー先のメモリ領域が重なっている場合、
結果は不定である。
.SH 返り値
.BR memccpy ()
は、\fIdest\fP 中に見つかった \fIc\fP の
次にあるキャラクター型の変数を指すポインタを返す。
見つからなかった場合、NULL を返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR bcopy (3),
.BR memcpy (3),
.BR memmove (3),
.BR strcpy (3),
.BR strncpy (3)
