.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:49:59 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 21 0:50:30 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <ueyama@campusnet.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.55
.\"
.TH MEMMOVE 3 1993-04-10 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
memmove \- メモリ領域をコピーする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "void *memmove(void *" dest ", const void *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR memmove ()
は、メモリ領域 \fIsrc\fP の先頭 \fIn\fP バイトを
メモリ領域 \fIdest\fP にコピーする。コピー元とコピー先の
領域が重なっていてもよい。
最初に
.I src
のバイトが
.I src
とも
.I dest
とも重ならない一時的な配列にコピーされてから、一時的な配列から
.I dest
にバイトのコピーが行われたかのように、コピーが行われる。
.SH 返り値
.BR memmove ()
は \fIdest\fP へのポインタを返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR bcopy (3),
.BR memccpy (3),
.BR memcpy (3),
.BR strcpy (3),
.BR strncpy (3),
.BR wmemmove (3)
