'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-23, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH MQ_UNLINK 3 2010-08-29 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
mq_unlink \- メッセージキューを削除する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <mqueue.h>
.sp
.BI "int mq_unlink(const char *" name );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR mq_unlink ()
は指定されたメッセージキュー
.I name
を削除する。
メッセージキュー名は直ちに削除される。
キュー自体は、そのキューをオープンした他のすべてのプロセスが
そのキューを参照する記述子をクローズした時点で破棄される。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR mq_unlink ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値を設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
呼び出し元プロセスがこのメッセージキューを削除 (unlink) する
許可を持たない。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I name
が長過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
指定された名前
.I name
を持つメッセージキューが存在しない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR mq_close (3),
.BR mq_getattr (3),
.BR mq_notify (3),
.BR mq_open (3),
.BR mq_receive (3),
.BR mq_send (3),
.BR mq_overview (7)
