.\" Copyright (c) OpenBSD Group
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Converted into a manpage again by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\"
.\" Added -lutil remark, 030718
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 22 21:42:05 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Mar  8 2003 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Sep 14 2003 by Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"
.\"WORD:	tty		端末
.\"WORD:	pseudoterminal	疑似端末
.\"
.TH OPENPTY 3  2010-06-13 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
openpty, login_tty, forkpty \- 端末ユーティリティ関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <pty.h>
.sp
.BI "int openpty(int *" amaster ", int *" aslave ", char *" name ,
.BI "            const struct termios *" termp ,
.BI "            const struct winsize *" winp );
.sp
.BI "pid_t forkpty(int *" amaster ", char *" name ,
.BI "              const struct termios *" termp ,
.BI "              const struct winsize *" winp );
.sp
.B #include <utmp.h>
.sp
.BI "int login_tty(int " fd );
.sp
\fI\-lutil\fP でリンクする。
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR openpty ()
関数は、使用可能な疑似端末 (pseudoterminal) を見つけて、
マスタとスレーブのファイル・ディスクリプタを
.I amaster
と
.I aslave
に入れて返す。
.I name
が NULL でない場合、スレーブのファイル名が
.I name
に返される。
.I termp
が NULL でない場合、スレーブの端末パラメータは
.I termp
の値に設定される。
.I winp
が NULL でない場合、スレーブのウインドウサイズは
.I winp
に設定される。

.BR login_tty ()
関数は、端末
.I fd
にログインする準備をする
.RI ( fd
は実際の端末デバイスでも、
.BR openpty ()
で返される疑似端末のスレーブでもよい)。
具体的には、新しいセッションを作成し、
.I fd
を呼び出し元のプロセスの制御端末とし、
呼び出し元の標準入力・標準出力・標準エラーのストリームを
.I fd
に設定した後、
.I fd
をクローズする。

.BR forkpty ()
関数は
.BR openpty (),
.BR fork (2),
.BR login_tty ()
を組み合わせ、疑似端末を操作する新しいプロセスを生成する。
疑似端末のマスタ側のファイル・ディスクリプタは
.I amaster
に返され、
.I name
が NULL でない場合には、スレーブのファイル名が
.I name
に返される。
.I termp
と
.I winp
引き数は、NULL でなければ、
疑似端末のスレーブ側の端末属性とウインドウサイズを決定する。
.SH 返り値
.BR openpty (),
.BR login_tty (),
.BR forkpty ()
の呼び出しが成功しなかった場合、
\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
はエラーを示す値に設定される。
成功した場合、
.BR openpty (),
.BR login_tty ()
および	
.BR forkpty ()
の子プロセスは 0 を返し、
.BR forkpty ()
の親プロセスは子プロセスのプロセス ID を返す。
.SH エラー
以下の場合に
.BR openpty ()
は失敗する:
.TP
.B ENOENT
使用可能な端末がない。
.LP
.BR ioctl (2)
が
.I fd
を呼び出し元のプロセスの制御端末に設定するのに失敗した場合、
.BR login_tty ()
は失敗する。
.LP
.BR openpty ()
または
.BR fork (2)
のどちらかが失敗した場合、
.BR forkpty ()
は失敗する。
.SH 準拠
これらは BSD の関数であり、libc5 と glibc2 に存在する。
POSIX での標準化はされていない。
.SH 注意
.\" これらの関数は libutil に含まれている。したがって、コンパイル時の
.\" オプションに
.\" .B \-lutil
.\" を加える必要がある。
.\"
glibc 2.8 で、
.BR openpty ()
と
.BR forkpty ()
の構造体へのポインタの引き数に
.B const
修飾子が追加された。

2.0.92 より前のバージョンの glibc では、
.BR openpty ()
は BSD 疑似端末ペアのファイル・ディスクリプタを返す。
2.0.92 以降の glibc では、
.BR openpty ()
はまず Unix 98 疑似端末ペアをオープンしようとし、それに失敗した場合に
BSD 疑似端末ペアのオープンへと移行する。
.SH バグ
誰も
.I name
に対してどのくらい大きさを予約しておけばいいか分からない。
したがって、NULL でない
.I name
を引き数として
.BR openpty ()
や
.BR forkpty ()
を呼び出すのは安全であるとは言えない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR fork (2),
.BR ttyname (3),
.BR pty (7)
