.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 30 14:07:37 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH POW10 3  2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
pow10, pow10f, pow10l \- 底が 10 の累乗関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double pow10(double " x );
.br
.BI "float pow10f(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double pow10l(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR pow10 ()
関数は 10 の \fIx\fP 乗の値を返す。
.SH バージョン
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.SH 準拠
これは GNU による拡張である。
.SH 注意
これらの関数は
.BR exp10 (3)
でリストされている関数と同一である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR exp10 (3),
.BR pow (3)
