.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:43:46 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 18 17:43:46 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PUTPWENT 3  2007-07-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
putpwent \- パスワードファイルエントリの書き込み
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <pwd.h>
.sp
.BI "int putpwent(const struct passwd *" p ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR putpwent ():
_SVID_SOURCE
.SH 説明
.BR putpwent ()
関数は、構造体 \fIp\fP からのパスワードエントリを
\fIstream\fP に結びつけられたファイルに書き込む。

.PP
\fIpasswd\fP 構造体は、\fI<pwd.h>\fP で以下のように定義されている:
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
struct passwd {
    char    *pw_name;        /* ユーザ名 */
    char    *pw_passwd;      /* ユーザのパスワード */
    uid_t    pw_uid;         /* ユーザ ID */
    gid_t    pw_gid;         /* グループ ID */
    char    *pw_gecos;       /* 本名 */
    char    *pw_dir;         /* ホームディレクトリ */
    char    *pw_shell;       /* シェルプログラム */
};
.fi
.in
.SH 返り値
.BR putpwent ()
関数は、成功した場合は 0 を、エラーが発生した場合は
\-1 を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
無効な(NULL)引数が渡された。
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.SH 関連項目
.BR endpwent (3),
.BR fgetpwent (3),
.BR getpw (3),
.BR getpwent (3),
.BR getpwnam (3),
.BR getpwuid (3),
.BR setpwent (3)
