.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\" and Copyright (C) 2008 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:40:56 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1995 by Mike Battersby (mib@deakin.edu.au)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-25, HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-08-08, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.05
.\"
.TH RAISE 3 2008-10-17 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
raise \- 呼び出し元にシグナルを送る
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int raise(int " sig );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR raise ()
関数は、呼び出し元のプロセスもしくはスレッドにシグナルを送る。
シングルスレッドのプログラムでは、以下と等価である。
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
kill(getpid(), sig);
.fi
.in
.PP
マルチスレッドのプログラムでは、以下と等価である。
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
pthread_kill(pthread_self(), sig);
.fi
.in
.PP
シグナルに起因してシグナル・ハンドラが呼び出される場合には、
.BR raise ()
が返るのは必ずシグナル・ハンドラが返った後になる。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 を、失敗した場合は 0 以外の値を返す。
.SH 準拠
C89, C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR getpid (2),
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR pthread_kill (3),
.BR signal (7)
