'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_POST 3 2009-03-30 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sem_post \- セマフォのロックを解除する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_post(sem_t *" sem );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR sem_post ()
は、
.I sem
が指すセマフォの値を 1 増やす (ロックを解除する)。その結果、
セマフォの値は 0 より大きな値に変化し、
.BR sem_wait (3)
で停止している別のプロセスやスレッドが呼び起こされ、
セマフォをロックできるようになる。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR sem_post ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、セマフォの値は変更せずに、 \-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I sem
は有効なセマフォではない。
.TP
.B EOVERFLOW
.\" Added in POSIX.1-2008 TC1 (Austin Interpretation 213)
一つのセマフォで使用できる最大値を超えてしまうところであった。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
.BR sem_post ()
は async-signal-safe である。
つまり、シグナルハンドラの中でも安全に呼び出すことができる。
.SH 例
.BR sem_wait (3)
参照。
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_getvalue (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
