'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_DESTROY 3 2006-03-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sem_destroy \- 名前なしセマフォを破棄する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_destroy(sem_t *" sem );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR sem_destroy ()
は
.I sem
が指すアドレスにある名前なしセマフォを破棄する。

.BR sem_destroy ()
を使って破棄するのは、
.BR sem_init (3)
で初期化したセマフォだけにすべきである。

他のプロセスやスレッドが
.RB ( sem_wait (3)
で) 待ち状態になっているセマフォを破棄した場合の挙動は定義されていない。

すでに破棄されたセマフォを、
.BR sem_init (3)
を使って再初期化される前に使用した場合、その結果は未定義である。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR sem_destroy ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I sem
は有効なセマフォではない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
名前なしセマフォは、そのセマフォが置かれているメモリが解放される前に、
.BR sem_destroy ()
を使って破棄しておくべきである。これを行わなかった場合、実装によっては
リソースのリークが起こりえる。
.\" NPTL ではリークは起こらない。sem_destroy () は何もしないだけ..
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_init (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
