'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_UNLINK 3 2006-03-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sem_unlink \- 名前付きセマフォを削除する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_unlink(const char *" name );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR sem_unlink ()
は、
.I name
で参照される名前付きセマフォを削除する。
セマフォの名前は直ちに削除される。
このセマフォをオープンしている他のすべてのプロセスがセマフォを
閉じて初めてセマフォの削除が行われる。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR sem_unlink ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
呼び出し元にはこのセマフォを削除する許可がない。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I name
が長すぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
指定された名前
.I name
のセマフォが存在しない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_getvalue (3),
.BR sem_open (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
