'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_INIT 3 2008-07-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sem_init \- 名前なしセマフォを初期化する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_init(sem_t *" sem ", int " pshared ", unsigned int " value );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.SH 説明
.BR sem_init ()
は、
.I sem
が指すアドレスにある名前なしセマフォを初期化する。
.I value
引き数はそのセマフォの初期値を指定する。

.I pshared
引き数は、このセマフォがプロセス内のスレッド間で共有されるのか、
プロセス間で共有されるのか、を示す。

.I pshared
が 0 の場合、セマフォはプロセス内のスレッド間で共有される。
セマフォはすべてのスレッドから参照可能なアドレスに配置すべきである
(例えば、大域変数や、ヒープ上に動的に割り当てられた変数など)。

.I pshared
が 0 以外の場合、セマフォはプロセス間で共有される。セマフォは
共有メモリ領域に配置すべきである
.RB ( shm_open (3),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR shmget (2)
参照)。
.RB ( fork (2)
で生成された子プロセスは親プロセスのメモリマッピングを継承するため、
子プロセスもセマフォにアクセスできる。)
共有メモリ領域にアクセスできるプロセスならば、どのプロセスでも
.BR sem_post (3)
や
.BR sem_wait (3)
などを使ってセマフォを操作できる。

すでに初期化済のセマフォを初期化した場合の挙動は定義されていない。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR sem_init ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I value
が
.B SEM_VALUE_MAX
を超えている。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.I pshared
が 0 以外だが、システムがプロセス共有セマフォをサポートしていない
.RB ( sem_overview (7)
参照)。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
妙なことに、POSIX.1-2001 は
.BR sem_init ()
が成功した場合に返すべき値を規定していない。
POSIX.1-2008 ではこれが修正され、成功時には 0 を返すことが規定された。
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_destroy (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
