.\" Written by Michael Haardt, Fri Nov 25 14:51:42 MET 1994
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Added sigsetjmp, Sun Mar  2 22:03:05 EST 1997, jrv@vanzandt.mv.com
.\" Modifications, Sun Feb 26 14:39:45 1995, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Seiiti Obara
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-05-27, Seiiti Obara <SEO@ma1.seikyou.ne.jp>
.\" Updated 1999-12-11, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Modified 2007-12-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2009-02-12, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:       stack context        スタックコンテキスト
.\"WORD:       signal masks         シグナルマスク
.\"WORD:       signal context       シグナルコンテキスト
.\"WORD:       low-level            低レベル
.\"
.TH SETJMP 3 2009-06-26 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
setjmp, sigsetjmp \- 非局所的なジャンプのために、スタックコンテキスト (stack context) を保存する
.SH 書式
.B #include <setjmp.h>
.sp
.nf
.BI "int setjmp(jmp_buf " env );

.BI "int sigsetjmp(sigjmp_buf " env ", int " savesigs );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR setjmp ():
「注意」参照。
.br
.BR sigsetjmp ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE
.SH 説明
.BR setjmp ()
と
.BR longjmp (3)
は、プログラムの低レベルなサブルーチン
において、エラーや割り込みが発生した時の処理に便利である。
.BR setjmp ()
は、
.BR longjmp (3)
によって使われる \fIenv\fP に
スタックコンテキスト/スタック環境を保存する。
.BR setjmp ()
を呼び出した
関数が返るときに、そのスタックコンテキストは無効になる。
.P
.BR sigsetjmp ()
も
.BR setjmp ()
と同様である。
\fIsavesigs\fP が 0 以外の場合、
このプロセスの現在のシグナルマスクも \fIenv\fP に保存され、
このシグナルは後で
.BR siglongjmp (3)
がこの \fIenv\fP で実行された際に復元される。
.SH 返り値
直接返ってくるときは、
.BR setjmp ()
と
.BR sigsetjmp ()
は 0 を返し、保存したコンテキストを使って
.BR longjmp (3)
や
.BR siglongjmp (3)
から返ってくるときは 0 以外を返す。
.SH 準拠
.BR setjmp ()
は C89, C99, POSIX.1-2001 で規定されている。
.BR sigsetjmp ()
は POSIX.1-2001 で規定されている。
.SH 注意
POSIX は、
.BR setjmp ()
がシグナルマスクを保存すべきかどうかを規定していない。
System V では保存しない。
4.3BSD では保存する;
4.3BSD にはシグナルコンテキストを保存しない関数 \fB_setjmp\fP もある。
デフォルトでは、Linux/glibc は System V の振る舞いに従うが、
.B _BSD_SOURCE
機能検査マクロが定義され、
.BR _POSIX_SOURCE ,
.BR _POSIX_C_SOURCE ,
.BR _XOPEN_SOURCE ,
.BR _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED ,
.BR _GNU_SOURCE ,
.B _SVID_SOURCE
のいずれも定義されていない時は BSD の振る舞いとなる。

移植性のある形でシグナルマスクを保存および復元したいのなら、
.BR sigsetjmp ()
と
.BR siglongjmp (3)
を使うこと。
.P
.BR setjmp ()
や
.BR sigsetjmp ()
を使うと、プログラムは理解しづらく、保守しにくいものになる。
別の方法が可能なら、それを使うべきである。
.SH 関連項目
.BR longjmp (3),
.BR siglongjmp (3)
