.\" Copyright (c) 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2008  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2008-08-21, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.04
.\" 
.TH SIGWAIT 3 2010-09-10 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sigwait \- シグナルを待つ
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>

.BI " int sigwait(const sigset_t *" set ", int *" sig );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR sigwait ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE
.ad b
.SH 説明
.BR sigwait ()
関数は、シグナル集合
.I set
で指定されたシグナルの一つが配送されるまで、
呼び出したスレッドの実行を中断する。
この関数はそのシグナルを受け取り (つまり、処理待ちのシグナルのリスト
からそのシグナルを削除し)、そのシグナル番号を
.I sig
に格納して返す。

.BR sigwait ()
の動作は
.BR sigwaitinfo (2)
と同じだが、以下の点が異なる。
.IP * 2
.BR sigwait ()
は、シグナルの内容を表す
.I siginfo_t
構造体を返すのではなく、単にシグナル番号を返す。
.IP *
返り値が
.BR sigwaitinfo (2)
とは異なる。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR sigwait ()
は 0 を返す。
エラーの場合、(「エラー」の節のリストにある) 正のエラー番号を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\" Does not occur for glibc.
.I set
に無効なシグナル番号が入っている。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
.BR sigwait ()
は
.BR sigtimedwait (2)
を使って実装されている。
.SH 例
.BR pthread_sigmask (3)
を参照。
.SH 関連項目
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signalfd (2),
.BR sigpending (2),
.BR sigsuspend (2),
.BR sigwaitinfo (2),
.BR sigsetops (3),
.BR signal (7)
