.\" Copyright (C) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" The pathconf note is from Walter Harms
.\" This is not a system call on Linux
.\"
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jun 29 23:36:41 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jan  9 22:50:29 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH STATVFS 3 2003-08-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
statvfs, fstatvfs \- ファイルシステムの統計を取得する
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/statvfs.h>
.sp
.BI "int statvfs(const char *" path ", struct statvfs *" buf );
.br
.BI "int fstatvfs(int " fd ", struct statvfs *" buf );
.SH 説明
関数
.BR statvfs ()
はマウントされたファイルシステムについての情報を返す。
.I path
はマウントされたファイルシステム中の任意のファイルのパス名である。
.I buf
は、だいたい以下のように定義されている
.I statvfs
構造体へのポインタである:

.in +4n
.nf
struct statvfs {
    unsigned long  f_bsize;    /* ファイルシステムのブロックサイズ */
    unsigned long  f_frsize;   /* フラグメントサイズ */
    fsblkcnt_t     f_blocks;   /* ファイルシステムのサイズ (f_frsize 単位) */
    fsblkcnt_t     f_bfree;    /* 解放されているブロック数 */
    fsblkcnt_t     f_bafvail;   /* 非特権ユーザ用に解放されているブロック数 */
    fsfilcnt_t     f_files;    /* inode 数 */
    fsfilcnt_t     f_ffree;    /* 解放されている inode の数 */
    fsfilcnt_t     f_favail;   /* 非特権ユーザ用に解放されている inode の数 */
    unsigned long  f_fsid;     /* ファイルシステム ID */
    unsigned long  f_flag;     /* マウントフラグ */
    unsigned long  f_namemax;  /* ファイル名の長さの最大値 */
};
.fi
.in

ここで、型
.I fsblkcnt_t
と
.I fsfilcnt_t
は
.I <sys/types.h>
で定義されている。
かつて、これらは共に
.I "unsigned long"
であった。

フィールド
.I f_flag
は (マウントフラグの) ビットマスクである
(マウントフラグについては、
.BR mount (8)
を参照すること)。
POSIX で定義されているビットは以下の通り:
.TP
.B ST_RDONLY
読み込み専用のファイルシステム。
.TP
.B ST_NOSUID
.BR exec (3)
に無視される set-user-id/set-group-ID ビット。
.LP
返された構造体の全てのメンバが全てのファイルシステムで
意味のある値であるか否かは、指定されていない。

.BR fstatvfs ()
は、ディスクリプタ
.I fd
で参照されるオープンされたファイルについて、同じ情報を返す。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、0 が返される。
エラーの場合、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.RB ( statvfs ()
の場合)
.I path
のディレクトリ部分に検索許可が与えられていない
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照すること)。
.TP
.B EBADF
.RB ( fstatvfs ()
の場合)
.I fd
が有効なオープンファイルディスクリプタではない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I buf
または
.I path
が無効なアドレスを指している。
.TP
.B EINTR
この呼び出しがシグナルによって中断された。
.TP
.B EIO
ファイルシステムから読み出している間に I/O エラーが発生した。
.TP
.B ELOOP
.RB ( statvfs ()
の場合)
.I path
にシンボリックリンクが多すぎる。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.RB ( statvfs ()
の場合)
.I path
が長すぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.RB ( statvfs ()
の場合)
.I path
で参照されるファイルが存在しない。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
十分なカーネルメモリが使用できない。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
ファイルシステムがこの呼び出しをサポートしていない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.RB ( statvfs ()
の場合)
.I path
のディレクトリ部分がディレクトリでない。
.TP
.B EOVERFLOW
いくつかの値は、返される構造体で表現するには大きすぎる。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
Linux カーネルには、このライブラリコールをサポートするために、
.BR statfs (2),
.BR fstatfs (2)
システムコールがある。

現在の glibc の実装において、
.sp
.nf
   pathconf(path, _PC_REC_XFER_ALIGN);
   pathconf(path, _PC_ALLOC_SIZE_MIN);
   pathconf(path, _PC_REC_MIN_XFER_SIZE);
.fi
.sp
は、それぞれ
.I "statvfs(path,buf)"
の返り値の
.IR f_frsize ,
.IR f_frsize ,
.I f_bsize
フィールドを使う。
.SH 関連項目
.BR statfs (2)
