.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:40:44 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-26, HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Modified 2007-05-28, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.48
.\"
.TH STRCOLL 3  2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strcoll \- 現在のロケールを使用して二つの文字列を比較する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "int strcoll(const char *" s1 ", const char *" s2 );
.fi
.SH 説明
\fbstrcoll\fP() 関数は二つの文字列 \fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP を比較する。
この関数は、\fIs1\fP が \fIs2\fP よりも小さいか、等しいか、大きいかによって
それぞれ負の整数、0、正の整数を返す。
比較は、プログラムの現在のロケールの \fBLC_COLLATE\fP カテゴリに応じて
解釈された文字列に基づいて行われる
.RB ( setlocale (3)
参照)。
.SH 返り値
.BR strcoll ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP が \fIs2\fP よりも小さいか、等しいか、
大きいかによって、それぞれ負の整数、0、正の整数を返す。
どちらの文字列も現在のロケールに応じて解釈されたものが使用される。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99.
.SH 注意
\fI"POSIX"\fP および \fI"C"\fP ロケールにおいては、
.BR strcoll ()
は
.BR strcmp (3)
と等価である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR bcmp (3),
.BR memcmp (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR strcmp (3),
.BR string (3),
.BR strxfrm (3)
