.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:02:26 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 18:51:38 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH STRLEN 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strlen \- 文字列の長さを計算する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t strlen(const char *" s );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR strlen ()
関数は文字列 \fIs\fP の長さを計算する。
このとき、終端 NULL バイト (\(aq\\0\(aq) は計算に含まれない。
.SH 返り値
.BR strlen ()
関数は \fIs\fP の中の文字数を返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99.
.SH 関連項目
.BR string (3),
.BR strnlen (3),
.BR wcslen (3),
.BR wcsnlen (3)
