.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:01:24 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanease Version Copyright (c) 1998 Ito Hiromi
.\"                 all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed May 27 22:13:35 JST 1998
.\"                 by Ito Hiromi (hiromi@marimo.or.jp)
.\" Updated Sat Dec 11 00:44:56 JST 1999
.\"		    by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.TH STRPBRK 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strpbrk \- 文字セット中の文字を文字列から検出する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "char *strpbrk(const char *" s ", const char *" accept );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR strpbrk ()
関数は文字列 \fIaccept\fP に含まれる文字が文字列 \fIs\fP に
おいて最初に現れる位置を捜し出す。
.SH 返り値
.BR strpbrk ()
関数は、 \fIs\fP に含まれる文字のうち、
\fIaccept\fP に含まれる文字のどれかに一致したものへの
ポインタを返す。
そのような文字が見つからなかった場合は NULL を返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99.
.SH 関連項目
.BR index (3),
.BR memchr (3),
.BR rindex (3),
.BR strchr (3),
.BR string (3),
.BR strsep (3),
.BR strspn (3),
.BR strstr (3),
.BR strtok (3),
.BR wcspbrk (3)
