.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:57:50 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 10:04:31 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.TH STRSPN 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strspn, strcspn \- 文字列から文字のセットを探す
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t strspn(const char *" s ", const char *" accept );
.sp
.BI "size_t strcspn(const char *" s ", const char *" reject );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR strspn ()
関数は、\fIaccept\fP に含まれる文字だけで構成される文字列
を \fIs\fP から探し、その最初の部分の長さを計算する。
.PP
.BR strcspn ()
関数は、\fIreject\fP に含まれない文字だけで構成される文字列
を \fIs\fP から探し、その最初の部分の長さを計算する。
.SH 返り値
.BR strspn ()
関数は、\fIaccept\fP からの文字だけで構成される \fIs\fP の
最初の部分の文字の数を返す。
.PP
.BR strcspn ()
関数は、\fIs\fP の最初の部分で、文字列 \fIreject\fP に
含まれない文字の数を返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99.
.SH 関連項目
.BR index (3),
.BR memchr (3),
.BR rindex (3),
.BR strchr (3),
.BR string (3),
.BR strpbrk (3),
.BR strsep (3),
.BR strstr (3),
.BR strtok (3),
.BR wcscspn (3),
.BR wcsspn (3)
