.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:59:03 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 26 13:13:20 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Modified Thu Dec 8 05:09:52 JST 1999
.\"	by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH STRSIGNAL 3 2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strsignal \- シグナルを説明する文字列を返す
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "char *strsignal(int " sig );
.sp
.BI "extern const char * const " sys_siglist [];
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR strsignal ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
glibc 2.10 より前:
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.SH 説明
.BR strsignal ()
関数は、引数 \fIsig\fP で渡されたシグナル番号を
説明する文字列を返す。
文字列は、次の
.BR strsignal ()
が呼ばれるまでの間だけ使用できる。
.PP
配列 \fIsys_siglist\fP はシグナルを説明する文字列を保持しており、
配列へのアクセスにはシグナル番号を添え字として用いる事ができる。
出来るだけこの配列の代わりに
.BR strsignal ()
関数を
使うべきである。
.SH 返り値
.BR strsignal ()
関数は、シグナルの適切な説明を返す。
もしシグナル番号が不正な場合は、未知のシグナル(unknown signal)を示す
メッセージを返す。
(Linux はそうではないが)不正なシグナル番号に対して、 NULL ポインタを
返すシステムもある。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008.
Solaris と BSD 系にも存在する。
.SH 関連項目
.BR psignal (3),
.BR strerror (3)
