.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:41:28 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 SHOJI Yasushi all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jun 26 1998 by SHOJI Yasushi <yashi@yashi.com>
.\" Updated & Modefied Sun Mar 7 1999 by Shouichi Saito
.\"
.TH STRXFRM 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
strxfrm \- 文字列の変換
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t strxfrm(char *" dest ", const char *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR strxfrm ()
関数は文字列 \fIsrc\fP に対して、次の条件を満たすよう
な変換をする: 「ある二つの文字列に対して、それぞれを
.BR strxfrm ()
で変換してから
.BR strcmp (3)
した結果と、
.BR strxfrm ()
による変換
を行わずに
.BR strcoll (3)
した結果と同じ」
変換した文字列の先頭から \fIn\fP 文字分が \fIdest\fP に代入される。
変換は、カテゴリ \fBLC_COLLATE\fP に対する、プログラムの現在のロケール
に基づいて行われる
.RB ( setlocale (3)
を参照のこと)。
.SH 返り値
.BR strxfrm ()
関数は、変換された文字列を \fIdest\fP に代入するときに
必要なバイト数から、終端の NULL バイト (\(aq\\0\(aq) の分を
引いたものを返す。もし返り値が \fIn\fP 以上の場合、
\fIdest\fP の内容は不定となる。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89, C99.
.SH 注意
\fI"POSIX"\fP または \fI"C"\fP ロケールでは、関数
.BR strxfrm ()
は、
関数
.BR strncpy (3)
を使って文字列をコピーするのと同じである。
.SH 関連項目
.BR bcmp (3),
.BR memcmp (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR strcmp (3),
.BR strcoll (3),
.BR string (3)
