.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\"    (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 17:42:24 JST
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\" Proof Reading: Takashi Yoshino
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH TAN 3 2010-09-11 ""  "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
tan, tanf, tanl \- 正接（タンジェント）関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double tan(double " x );
.br
.BI "float tanf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double tanl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR tanf (),
.BR tanl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
.BR tan ()
関数は \fIx\fP の正接（タンジェント）の値を返す。
\fIx\fP はラジアン単位で指定する。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の正接 (タンジェント) を返す。

.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.I x
が正の無限大か負の無限大の場合、
領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、NaN が返される。

結果がオーバーフローする場合、範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、
各関数はそれぞれ
.BR HUGE_VAL ,
.BR HUGE_VALF ,
.B HUGE_VALL
を返す。
.\" I think overflow can't occur, because the closest floating-point
.\" representation of pi/2 is still not close enough to pi/2 to
.\" produce a large enough value to overflow.
.\" Testing certainly seems to bear this out.  -- mtk, Jul 08
.\"
.\" POSIX.1 allows an optional underflow error;
.\" glibc 2.8 doesn't do this
.\" POSIX.1 an optional range error for subnormal x;
.\" glibc 2.8 doesn't do this
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
領域エラー (domain error): \fIx\fP は無限大である
.I errno
に
.B EDOM
が設定される (「バグ」の節も参照)。
不正 (invalid) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_INVALID )
が上がる。
.TP
範囲エラー (range error): 結果のオーバーフロー
.\" Unable to test this case, since the best approximation of
.\" pi/2 in double precision only yields a tan() value of 1.633e16.
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR ERANGE .
オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
が上がる。
.SH バグ
.\" http://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6782
バージョン 2.10 より前の glibc の実装では、
領域エラーが発生した際に、
.I error
に
.B EDOM
が設定されなかった。
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.SH 関連項目
.BR acos (3),
.BR asin (3),
.BR atan (3),
.BR atan2 (3),
.BR cos (3),
.BR ctan (3),
.BR sin (3)
