.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 by Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 19:43:29 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\"
.\" Added BUGS section, aeb, 950919
.\"
.TH TOASCII 3 2009-03-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
toascii \- 文字を ASCII に変換する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <ctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int toascii(int " "c" );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR toascii ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE
.SH 説明
.BR toascii ()
は上位ビットをクリアする事により、
ASCII 文字セットに適合するように \fIc\fP を 7ビットの \fIunsigned char\fP
に変換する。
.SH 返り値
変換された文字を返す。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
POSIX.1-2008 は
.BR toascii ()
を廃止予定としている。
ローカライズされたアプリケーションでは、移植性を確保しつつ、
この関数を使用することはできない点に注意すること。
.SH バグ
この関数を使う事でたくさんの人々が不幸になるだろう。
この関数はアクセント付きの字をでたらめな文字に変換してしまう。
.SH 関連項目
.BR isascii (3),
.BR tolower (3),
.BR toupper (3)
