.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:45:39 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2000-02-13 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui and HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Aug 29 19:47:32 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <rui@campus.or.jp>
.\"         by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Mar 12 21:42:31 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH TOUPPER 3 1993-04-04 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
toupper, tolower \- 小文字を大文字にする。または大文字を小文字にする。
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <ctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int toupper(int " "c" );
.br
.BI "int tolower(int " "c" );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR toupper ()
は、
.I c
が大文字にできる文字であるならば大文字に変換する。
.PP
.BR tolower ()
は
.I c
が小文字にできる文字であるならば小文字に変換する。
.PP
もし
.I c
が
.I unsigned char
の値でないか
.B EOF
ならば、これらの関数の動作は未定義である。
.SH 返り値
変換ができれば変換後の文字を返す。できなければ変換前の
.I c
を返す。
.SH 準拠
C89, C99, 4.3BSD.
.SH バグ
なにが大文字でなにが小文字なのかということの詳細は、現在のロケールに
依存している。たとえば、デフォルトの
.B """C"""
ロケールではウムラウトを認識しないため、それらの文字は変換できない。
.PP
.\" また、英語以外のロケールでは、大文字と小文字が正しく対応しない
.\" ことがある。たとえば、ドイツ語のエスツェットなどである。
いくつかの非英語ロケールでは、対応する大文字を持たない小文字が存在する。
ドイツ語のエスツェットが一つの例である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR isalpha (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR towlower (3),
.BR towupper (3),
.BR locale (7)
