.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Moved to man3, aeb, 980612
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 18 Jul 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Sun Dec 18 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ULIMIT 3 2008-08-06 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ulimit \- ユーザー制限を取得・設定する
.SH 書式
.B #include <ulimit.h>
.sp
.BI "long ulimit(int " cmd ", long " newlimit );
.SH 説明
注意: このルーチンは古い。
代わりに
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR sysconf (3)
などを用いること。
シェルコマンドとしての
.BR ulimit ()
については、
.BR bash (1)
を見ること。

.BR ulimit ()
は呼び出し元のプロセスに関する制限のいくつかを取得・設定する。
.I cmd
引き数には、以下の値のうちのどれか一つを与えることができる。
.TP
.B UL_GETFSIZE
ファイルサイズに関する制限を返す。単位は 512 バイト。
.TP
.B UL_SETFSIZE
ファイルサイズに関する制限を設定する。
.TP
.B 3
(Linux では実装されていない)
データセグメントで指定できるアドレスの最大値を返す。
.TP
.B 4
(実装されているが、対応するシンボリックな定数は存在しない)
プロセスがオープンできるファイル数の最大値を返す。
.SH 返り値
成功すると
.BR ulimit ()
は 0 または正の値を返す。
エラーが生じると \-1 を返し、
.I errno
を適切な値に設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
非特権プロセスが制限値を増加させようとした。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001.
POSIX.1-2008 は
.BR ulimit ()
を廃止予定としている。
.SH 関連項目
.BR bash (1),
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR sysconf (3)
