.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Nov 2 23:08:42 2001
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH UNLOCKED_STDIO 3  2008-08-29 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
getc_unlocked, getchar_unlocked, putc_unlocked,
putchar_unlocked \- ロックを行わずに標準入出力を行う関数群
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.sp
.BI "int getc_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.B "int getchar_unlocked(void);"
.BI "int putc_unlocked(int " c ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "int putchar_unlocked(int " c );
.sp
.BI "void clearerr_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int feof_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int ferror_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fileno_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fflush_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fgetc_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fputc_unlocked(int " c ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "size_t fread_unlocked(void *" ptr ", size_t " size ", size_t " n ,
.BI "                      FILE *" stream );
.BI "size_t fwrite_unlocked(const void *" ptr ", size_t " size ", size_t " n ,
.BI "                      FILE *" stream );
.sp
.BI "char *fgets_unlocked(char *" s ", int " n ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fputs_unlocked(const char *" s ", FILE *" stream );
.sp
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t getwc_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.B "wint_t getwchar_unlocked(void);"
.BI "wint_t fgetwc_unlocked(FILE *" stream );
.BI "wint_t fputwc_unlocked(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "wint_t putwc_unlocked(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "wint_t putwchar_unlocked(wchar_t " wc );
.BI "wchar_t *fgetws_unlocked(wchar_t *" ws ", int " n ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "int fputws_unlocked(const wchar_t *" ws ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.ad l
.in
.sp
.BR getc_unlocked (),
.BR getchar_unlocked (),
.BR putc_unlocked (),
.BR putchar_unlocked ():
.RS 4
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE ||
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.RE
.sp
.BR clearerr_unlocked (),
.BR feof_unlocked (),
.BR ferror_unlocked (),
.BR fileno_unlocked (),
.BR fflush_unlocked (),
.BR fgetc_unlocked (),
.BR fputc_unlocked (),
.BR fread_unlocked (),
.BR fwrite_unlocked ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.RE
.sp
.BR fgets_unlocked (),
.BR fputs_unlocked (),
.BR getwc_unlocked (),
.BR getwchar_unlocked (),
.BR fgetwc_unlocked (),
.BR fputwc_unlocked (),
.BR putwchar_unlocked (),
.BR fgetws_unlocked (),
.BR fputws_unlocked ():
.RS 4
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
これらの関数は、末尾に "_unlocked" がついていない関数と同じ動作をするが、
ファイルのロックを使用しない点が異なる。(これらの関数自身はファイルのロック
をセットせず、他の関数によってロックがセットされているかどうかのチェックも
行わない) それゆえ、スレッド(thread)で安全に使用することができない。
.BR flockfile (3)
を参照のこと。
.SH 準拠
.BR getc_unlocked (),
.BR getchar_unlocked (),
.BR putc_unlocked (),
.BR putchar_unlocked ()
の 4 つの関数は
POSIX.1-2001 に規定されている。

非標準の
.BR *_unlocked ()
の仲間は 2、3 の UNIX システムで定義されており、
最近の glibc では使用可能であるが、
.\" E.g., in HP-UX 10.0. In HP-UX 10.30 they are called obsolescent, and
.\" moved to a compatibility library.
.\" Available in HP-UX 10.0: clearerr_unlocked, fclose_unlocked,
.\" feof_unlocked, ferror_unlocked, fflush_unlocked, fgets_unlocked,
.\" fgetwc_unlocked, fgetws_unlocked, fileno_unlocked, fputs_unlocked,
.\" fputwc_unlocked, fputws_unlocked, fread_unlocked, fseek_unlocked,
.\" ftell_unlocked, fwrite_unlocked, getc_unlocked, getchar_unlocked,
.\" getw_unlocked, getwc_unlocked, getwchar_unlocked, putc_unlocked,
.\" putchar_unlocked, puts_unlocked, putws_unlocked, putw_unlocked,
.\" putwc_unlocked, putwchar_unlocked, rewind_unlocked, setvbuf_unlocked,
.\" ungetc_unlocked, ungetwc_unlocked.
これらの関数は使わない方がよいだろう。
.SH 関連項目
.BR flockfile (3),
.BR stdio (3)
