.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Tue Oct 19 02:13:45 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCPY 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
wcsncpy \- 固定長のワイド文字文字列をコピーする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcsncpy(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR wcsncpy ()
関数は、
.BR strncpy (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は \fIsrc\fP が指すワイド文字文字列から、
終端の NULL ワイド文字 (L\(aq\\0\(aq) を
含めて最大 \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字を、\fIdest\fP が指す配列にコピーする。
ちょうど \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字が \fIdest\fP に書き込まれる。
\fIwcslen(src)\fP の長さが \fIn\fP より小さければ、\fIdest\fP が指す
配列の残りのワイド文字の部分は NULL ワイド文字で埋められる。
\fIwcslen(src)\fP の長さが \fIn\fP 以上ならば、\fIdest\fP が指す文字列
が NULL ワイド文字で終端されることはない。
.PP
これらの配列は重なってはならない。
.PP
プログラマは、少なくとも \fIn\fP 文字のワイド文字が入るだけの領域を
\fIdest\fP に対して確保しなければならない。
.SH 返り値
.BR wcsncpy ()
は \fIdest\fP を返す。
.SH 準拠
C99.
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncpy (3)
