.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 23:40:56 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCMP 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
wcsncmp \- 2 つの固定長ワイド文字文字列を比較する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcsncmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR wcsncmp ()
関数は、
.BR strncmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs1\fP が指すワイド文字文字列と \fIs2\fP が指すワイド文
字文字列を比較するが、最大でも先頭のワイド文字 \fIn\fP 個までしか比較
しない。またいずれかの文字列に NULL ワイド文字 (L\(aq\\0\(aq) が現れたら、
比較はその位置で終了する。
.SH 返り値
.BR wcsncmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP がそれぞれ指す文字列を
\fIn\fP 文字に収まるように切り詰めたものが等しければ 0 を返す。
この関数は、異なる文字が最初に現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)
において、その位置にある文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より大きければ
正の値を返す。異なる文字が最初に現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)
において、その位置にある文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より小さければ
負の値を返す。
.SH 準拠
C99.
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncmp (3),
.BR wcsncasecmp (3)
