.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Kim Letkeman.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)cal.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 18 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 16 Feb 2001 by Nakano Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Tue May  7 01:05:42 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.Dd June 6, 1993
.Dt CAL 1
.Os
.Sh 名前
.Nm cal
.Nd カレンダーを表示する
.Sh 書式
.Nm cal
.Op Fl smjy13
.Op [ Ar month ] Ar year
.Sh 説明
.Nm cal
は簡単なカレンダーを表示する。
引数を指定しないと、今月のカレンダーが表示される。
オプションは以下の通り。
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl 1
一つの月だけを出力する (これがデフォルトである)。
.It Fl 3
先月/今月/来月 形式で出力する。
.It Fl s
日曜日を週の最初の曜日にする (これがデフォルトである)。
.It Fl m
月曜日を週の最初の曜日にする。
.It Fl j
ユリウス日付 (1 月 1 日を第 1 日とする年間通算日) を表示する。
.It Fl y
今年のカレンダーを表示する。
.El
.Pp
引数をひとつ (1〜9999) 指定すると、その年のカレンダーが表示される。
年を表す数字は全桁指定する必要がある。
.Dq Li cal 89
と指定しても、1989 年のカレンダーは
.Em 表示されない。
引数を二つ指定すると、月 (1〜12) と年として解釈される。
パラメータをひとつも指定しないと、今月のカレンダーが表示される。
.Pp
年は 1 月 1 日から始まる。
.Pp
グレゴリオ暦への切り替えは 1752 年の 9 月 3 日に行われたと仮定している。
この時までにほとんどの国が切り替えを承認した。
(ただし 1900 年初頭まで承認しなかった国も、僅かながらあった)。
この切り替えにより、この日から 10 日間が削除されたため、
この月のカレンダは少し変になっている。
.Sh 履歴
.Nm
コマンドは
Version 6 AT&T UNIX
で登場した。
.Sh 他のバージョン
このプログラムを精巧に作り上げ、
カラー・休日・誕生日・メモ・予定などをサポートしたバージョンも存在する。
例えば、http://home.sprynet.com/~cbagwell/projects.html から入手できる
cal や GNU gcal を試してみよ。
