.\" chkdupexe.1 -- 
.\" Created: Sat Mar 11 18:19:44 1995 by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Revised: Sat Mar 11 19:07:05 1995 by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Revised: Wed Jul  5 01:56:26 1995 by shields@tembel.org
.\" Copyright 1995 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 18 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CHKDUPEXE 1 "11 Mar 1995" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
chkdupexe \- 重複している実行ファイルを探す
.SH 書式
.B chkdupexe
.SH 説明
.B chkdupexe
は、バイナリがよく置かれる場所 (プログラムにハードコードされている)
と $PATH とをスキャンし、リンク先の無いシンボリックリンクや、
名前の重なっているバイナリファイルを報告する。
.SH 著者
Nicolai Langfeldt, Michael Shields.

