.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)colrm.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\" %FreeBSD: src/usr.bin/colrm/colrm.1,v 1.3.2.3 2001/08/16 13:16:45 ru Exp %
.\" $FreeBSD: doc/ja_JP.eucJP/man/man1/colrm.1,v 1.5 2001/07/29 05:14:50 horikawa Exp $
.\" Updated Fri May 13 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.Dd March 14, 1991
.Dt COLRM 1
.Os BSD 3
.Sh 名称
.Nm colrm
.Nd 指定した桁を削除する
.Sh 書式
.Nm colrm
.Op Ar startcol Op Ar endcol
.Sh 解説
.Nm Colrm
は、指定された桁をファイルの各行から削除します。
ファイルは標準入力から読み込まれ、結果は標準出力に書き出されます。
.Pp
引数一つだけが与えられた場合は、
指定された桁より前のすべての桁が表示されます。
二つの引数が指定された場合は、
一つ目の桁と二つ目の桁の間の桁が削除されます。
.Pp
桁の番号づけは 1 から始まります。
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr awk 1 ,
.Xr column 1 ,
.Xr cut 1 ,
.Xr paste 1
.Sh 歴史
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 3.0
から登場しました。
