.\" Copyright 1999 John D. Polstra.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"      This product includes software developed by John D. Polstra.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id: cvpasswd.1,v 1.1 2000/01/22 21:02:22 nakano Exp $
.\"
.\" translated Sun Jan 23 03:13:03 JST 2000
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.Dd February 7, 1999
.Os FreeBSD
.Dt CVPASSWD 1
.Sh 名称
.Nm cvpasswd
.Nd CVSup の認証のためにパスワードにスクランブルをかける
.Sh 書式
.Nm
.Ar clientName
.Ar serverName
.Sh 解説
.Nm
ユーティリティは、
.Nm CVSup
のサーバの認証データベースで使うスクランブル済みのパスワード
を生成します。このユーティリティはクライアント名とサーバ名を
指定して起動します。
.Ar ClientName
はサーバへのアクセス権を得るためにクライアントが使う名前です。
慣習的に、全てのクライアント名で e-mail アドレスが使われます(例:
.Ql BillyJoe@FreeBSD.ORG
)。
クライアント名では大文字・小文字は区別されません。
.Pp 
.Ar ServerName
は、クライアントがアクセスしようとしている
.Nm CVSup
サーバの名前です。これは慣習的に、正規化され完全に指定されたサーバの
ドメイン名となります(例:
.Ql CVSup.FreeBSD.ORG
)。
これはサーバが自分自身のものと考えている名前と一致しなければなりません。
この名前では大文字・小文字は区別されません。
.Pp
指定されたサーバに対しての認証を設定するには、以下の手順を行う必要
があります:
.Bl -enum
.It
公式な
.Ar serverName
をサーバの管理者、または別の情報源から入手します。
.It
適切な
.Ar clientName
を選びます。
必要に応じてサーバの管理者がユーザに連絡できるように、これは有効な
e-mail アドレスの形式でなければなりません。
.It
秘密の
.Ar password
を自由に決めます。
.It
.Nm cvpasswd
を実行し、求められた時に
.Ar password
を入力します。このユーティリティはサーバの管理者に送る情報を 1 行で
出力し、
.Li $ Ns Ev HOME Ns Pa /.cvsup/auth
ファイルの修正方法の説明を出力します。この行を安全な経路でサーバの管理者
に送ってください。
.El
.Pp
.Li $ Ns Ev HOME Ns Pa /.cvsup/auth
にはパスワードが入っているので、自分以外は誰も読めないように必ずしてく
ださい。
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width $HOME/.cvsup/authxx -compact
.It Li $ Ns Ev HOME Ns Pa /.cvsup/auth
認証パスワードファイル。
.El
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr cvsup 1 ,
.Xr cvsupd 8
.Pp
.Bd -literal
http://www.polstra.com/projects/freeware/CVSup/
.Ed
.Sh 作者
.An John Polstra Aq jdp@polstra.com


