.\"
.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jun 25 22:07:43 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH IGAWK 1 "Nov 3 1999" "Free Software Foundation" "Utility Commands"
.SH 名前
igawk \- インクルードファイルを使う gawk
.SH 書式
.B igawk
[ all
.I gawk
options ]
.B \-f
.I program-file
[
.B \-\^\-
] file .\^.\^.
.br
.B igawk
[ all
.I gawk
options ]
[
.B \-\^\-
]
.I program-text
file .\^.\^.
.SH 説明
.I igawk
は
.IR gawk (1)
に「インクルードファイル」の機能を追加する簡単なシェルスクリプトである。
.PP
.I igawk
で使う AWK プログラムは
.I gawk
と同じであるが、
カレントディレクトリまたは検索パスのディレクトリにあるファイル
.B getopt.awk
をインクルードするために、
.RS
.sp
.ft B
@include getopt.awk
.ft R
.sp
.RE
のような行をプログラムに書くことができる。
.SH オプション
AWK 言語と
.I gawk
がサポートするオプションについての完全な説明は、
.IR gawk (1)
を参照すること。
.SH 例
.nf
.ft B
cat << EOF > test.awk
@include getopt.awk
.sp
BEGIN {
	while (getopt(ARGC, ARGV, "am:q") != \-1)
		\&.\^.\^.
}
EOF
.sp
igawk \-f test.awk
.ft R
.fi
.SH 関連項目
.IR gawk (1)
.PP
.IR "Effective AWK Programming" ,
Edition 1.0, published by the Free Software Foundation, 1995.
.SH 著者
Arnold Robbins
.RB ( arnold@skeeve.com ).
