'\"
.\" (C) Copyright 1999 David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 14 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO all rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Updated Fri Aug 19 02:54:00 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH MANLINT 1 "14 July 1999" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
manlint \- man ページや mdoc ページのエラーを報告するプログラム
.SH 書式
.BR manlint " [ " options " ] [ " "list of files" " ] "
.SH 説明
.B manlint
は、マクロパッケージ man や mdoc を使用したページ整形中の lint (エラー) を
見つけ出すプログラムである。
言わば、通常のテキストに対するスペルチェッカーのようなものだ。
.B manlint
は許可されるマクロとエスケープシーケンスの一覧を持ち、
許可されるリストにないマクロやエスケープシーケンスが
使用されていれば、それを報告する。
許可されるリストには、
.BR man (7)
と
.BR mdoc (7)
で定義される全てのマクロと、
.BR man (7)
で定義される troff の安全なサブセットが含まれる。
.B manlint
は、整形ページが様々なルールに従っているかもチェックする。
.PP
ある man ページが
.B manlint
のチェックを通るようなら、そのページは可搬性が高いと考えられる。
troff の全てを実装しているわけではない
.BR man2html (1)
のようなツールでも使うことができるはずだ。
.PP
ファイルのリストを省略した場合は、標準入力を使う。
"-" という名前のファイルは標準入力として解釈される。
.SH バグ
現在のところ、このプログラムは非常に不完全である。
オプションはなく、実際にはエスケープシーケンスをチェックしない。
また mdoc フォーマットを処理できない。
しかし、このプログラムが何をすべきかは明らかであり、
現在の状態でも既存の man ファイルにある多くの問題を見付けることができる。
.SH 作者
.BR "manlint" 
の原作者は David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) である。
現在のメンテナーは Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR man (7),
.BR mdoc (7).
