.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1996  Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 25 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH nlmconv 1 "March 1996" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.SH 名前
nlmconv \- オブジェクトコードを NLM に変換する

.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B nlmconv
.RB "[\|" \-I\ \fIbfdname\fB\ |\ \-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-O\ \fIbfdname\fB\ |\ \-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-T\ \fIheaderfile\fB\ |\ \-\-header\-file=\fIheaderfile\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-V\ |\ \-\-version\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-help\fR "\|]" 
.B infile
.B outfile

.SH 説明
.B nlmconv
はリロケータブルなオブジェクトファイル
.I infile
を NetWare ローダブルモジュール
.B outfile
に変換する。この際 NLM のヘッダ情報
.I headerfile
を読むようにもできる。 NLM コマンドファイル言語の記述に関する説明は
.I The NewWare Tool Maker Specification Manual
を見よ。これは Novell, Inc. より入手できる。
現在
.B nlmconv
が対応している i386 のオブジェクトファイル形式は
.BR COFF 、 ELF 、 a.out
である。 SPARC のオブジェクトファイル形式としては
.BR ELF と a.out
に対応している。
.br
.B nlmconv
は
.I infile
の読み込みに GNU Binary File Descriptor library を利用している。

.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-I \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname
ソースファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。デフォルトではフォーマットを推測する。
.TP
.B \-O \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname
出力ファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
にする。デフォルトでは
.B nlmconv
は出力フォーマットを入力フォーマットから導出する。例えば入力ファイルが 
i386 のものなら、出力ファイルは
.I nlm32\-i386
となる。
.TP
.B \-T \fIheaderfile\fR, \fB\-\-header\-file=\fIheaderfile
NLM ヘッダ情報を
.I headerfile
から得る。 NLM コマンドファイル言語の記述に関する説明は
.I The NewWare Tool Maker Specification Manual
を見よ。これは Novell, Inc. より入手できる。
.TP
.B \-V\fR, \fB\-\-version
.B nlmconv
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-h\fR, \fB\-\-help
.B nlmconv
のオプションの要約を表示して終了する。

.SH 関連項目
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1993)、

.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
