.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)rcp.1	6.14 (Berkeley) 7/27/91
.\"	$Id: rcp.1,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:15 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 25 1995
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Updated Tue Nov 14 21:33:16 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RCP 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.Sh 名前
.Nm rcp
.Nd リモートファイルのコピー
.Sh 書式
.Nm rcp
.Op Fl px
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Ar file1 file2
.Nm rcp
.Op Fl px
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Ar file ...
.Ar directory
.Sh 説明
.Nm rcp
は、計算機間でファイルをコピーをするプログラムである。
引き数
.Ar file
と
.Ar directory
は、``rname@rhost:path'' という形式のリモート計算機上のファイル名、
またはローカルファイル名
(`:' を含んでいない名前と `:' の前に `/' がある名前) である。
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl r
コピー元のうちのどれかがディレクトリの場合、
.Nm rcp
はそのディレクトリをルートとするサブツリーをコピーする
(ディレクトリ下の各ファイルを再帰的にコピーする)。
この場合、コピー先もディレクトリでなければならない。
.It Fl p
.Fl p
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm rcp
は
.Ar umask
を無視して、コピー元ファイルの修正時刻とアクセス権を
コピー先ファイルに保存 (複製) する。
デフォルトでは、コピー先ファイル
.Ar file2
が既に存在している場合は、そのアクセス権と所有者は引き継がれ、
コピー先ファイルが存在しない場合は、
コピー先ホストの
.Xr umask 2
でマスクしたアクセス権が使われる。
.It Fl k
.Fl k
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm rcp
は
.Xr krb_realmofhost 3
で決定されるリモートホストの管理領域 (realm) ではなく、
.Ar realm
で指定した管理領域におけるリモートホストのチケットを取得しようとする。
.It Fl x
.Fl x
オプションは
.Nm rcp
で送るすべてのデータの
.Tn DES
暗号化を有効にする。
これにより、レスポンスタイムと
.Tn CPU
の利用率に影響が生じるが、セキュリティは向上する。
.El
.Pp
.Ar path
がフルパス名でない場合、
.Ar rhost
上のユーザー
.Ar ruser
のログインディレクトリからの相対パスとして解釈される。
また、フルパスでない場合に
リモートユーザー名が指定されていないと、
現在のユーザー名のログインディレクトリからの相対パスとして解釈される。
メタキャラクタがリモートマシンのシェルで解釈されるように、
リモートホスト上の
.Ar path
を (\e, ", \(aa を使って) クォートする必要がある。
.Pp
.Nm rcp
はパスワードを要求するプロンプトを出さない。
このプログラムは
.Xr rsh 1
を使ってリモート実行を行い、これと同様のユーザーの認証を必要とする。
.Pp
.Nm rcp
は、コピー元ファイルもコピー先ファイルもリモートマシン上にある場合のような、
第三者によるコピーも可能である。
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr cp 1 ,
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr rsh 1 ,
.Xr rlogin 1
.Sh 履歴
.Nm rcp
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
ここで説明している
.Nm rcp
は、
.Bx 4.3 Reno
で Kerberos を組み込んで再実装されたバージョンである。
.Sh バグ
コピー先がディレクトリでなければならない場合に
ファイルが指定されていても、
全ての場合で検出できるとは限らない。
.Pp
リモートホスト上のファイル
.Pa \&.login ,
.Pa \&.profile ,
.Pa \&.cshrc
にあるコマンドが生成する出力によって混乱することがある。
.Pp
コピー先のマシンで
.Bx 4.2
バージョンの
.Nm rcp
が動作している場合、コピー先のユーザー名とホスト名を
``rhost.rname'' のように指定しなければならない。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
