.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU seq man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 24 02:44:40 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	floating point number	浮動小数点数
.\"
.TH seq 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH 名前
seq \- 単調増加 (減少) する数値列を表示する
.SH 書式
.B seq [\-w] [\-f \fIFORMAT\fB] [\-s \fISEP\fB] [\-\-equal\-width] [\-\-format=\fIFORMAT\fB] [\-\-separator=\fISEP\fB]
.BI < LAST " | " "FIRST LAST" " | " "FIRST INCR LAST" >

.B seq [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH 説明
.B seq
は \fIFIRST\fR から \fILAST\fR まで、\fIINCR\fR ずつ加えた数値を表示する。
.I LAST
または
.I INCR
が省略された場合、デフォルトは 1 になる。
すべての数値は浮動小数点数として解釈される。
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-f \fIFORMAT\fB, \-\-format=\fIFORMAT"
\fBprintf(3)\fR のフォーマットに \fIFORMAT\fR を用いる。(デフォルト: %g)
.TP
.B "\-s \fISEP\fB, \-\-separator=\fISEP"
数値を \fISEP\fR で区切る。(デフォルト: `\\n')
.TP
.B "\-w, \-\-equal\-width"
桁数を揃えるために (先頭を) 0 で埋める。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
使用法のメッセージを標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.SH 注意
バグは bug-sh-utils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
このページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が更新した。
