.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)whereis.1 from UCB 4.2
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 17 03:19:58 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH WHEREIS 1 "8 May 1994"
.SH 名前
whereis \- コマンドのバイナリ・ソース・man ページの場所を示す
.SH 書式
.B whereis
[
.B \-bmsu
] [
.B \-BMS
.IR directory .\|.\|.
.B \-f
]
\fIfilename\fP\|
\&.\|.\|.
.IX  "whereis command"  ""  "\fLwhereis\fP \(em find program"
.IX  find "program \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.IX  "locate program"  ""   "locate program \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.IX  command  locate  ""   "locate \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.SH 説明
.B whereis
は指定したファイルのソース・バイナリ・man ページセクションの場所を示す。
与えられた名前は、最初に始めのパス名の部分が取り除かれ、次に
.BR .c
のような
.BI . ext
という形式の拡張子が取り除かれる。
ソースコード管理に使われている
.B s.
というプレフィックスがついたファイルも表示される。
.B whereis
は、標準的な Linux ファイル階層中で指定したプログラムを探す。
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB\-b
バイナリのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-m
man ページセクションのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-s
ソースのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-u
通常とは異なるエントリを探す。
要求されるタイプの 1 つのエントリがファイルにない場合、
通常とは異なるファイルと呼ばれる。
よって、
.RB ` "whereis\ \ \-m\ \ \-u\ \ *" '
は、カレントディレクトリのファイルから man ページがないものを探す。
.TP
.B \-B
.B whereis
がバイナリを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-M
.B whereis
が man ページセクションを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-S
.B whereis
がソースを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-f
直前のディレクトリリストを終了させ、
ファイル名指定の開始であることを示す。
.BR \-B ,
.BR \-M ,
.B \-S
オプションのいずれかを使う場合は、
このオプションを
.IR 使わなければならない 。
.SH 例
.B /usr/bin
にあるファイルから
.B /usr/man/man1
に man ページがなく
.BR /usr/src
にソースがあるようなもの探す。
.IP
.nf
.ft B
example% cd /usr/bin
example% whereis \-u \-M /usr/man/man1 \-S /usr/src \-f *
.fi
.ft R
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
.B /{bin,sbin,etc}
.TP
.B /usr/{lib,bin,old,new,local,games,include,etc,src,man,sbin,
.B X386,TeX,g++-include}
.TP
.B /usr/local/{X386,TeX,X11,include,lib,man,etc,bin,games,emacs}
.SH 関連項目
.BR chdir (2V)
.SH バグ
.B whereis
は実行を速くするために
.BR chdir (2V)
を使うので、
.BR \-M ,
.BR \-S ,
.B \-B
に指定するパス名はフルパスでなければならない;
つまりパス名は
.RB ` / '
で始まっていなければならない。
.PP
.B whereis
はハードコードされたパスを持っているので、
探しているものとは違うものが見つかるかもしれない。
