.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Robert Paul Corbett.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)yacc.1	5.7 (Berkeley) 7/30/91
.\"	$Id: yacc.1,v 1.1 1999/08/11 09:38:32 nakano Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 30, 1991
.Dt YACC 1
.Os
.Sh 名称
.Nm yacc
.Nd
.Tn LALR(1)
パーサジェネレータ
.Sh 書式
.Nm yacc
.Op Fl dlrtv
.Op Fl b Ar prefix
.Ar filename
.Sh 解説
.Nm yacc
は、
.Ar filename
のファイルから文法仕様を読み取り、その仕様から
.Tn LR(1)
パーサを生成します。
パーサは、
.Tn LALR(1)
解析テーブルと、C 言語で書かれたドライバルーチンのセットから構成
されています。
.Nm yacc
は通常、
.Pa y.tab.c
というファイルに解析テーブルとドライバルーチンを書き込みます。
.Pp
以下のオプションが提供されています:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Fl b Ar prefix
.Fl b
オプションは、出力ファイル名の先頭に加えるプリフィックス文字列を
.Ar prefix
に変更します。
デフォルトのプリフィックスは
.Ar y.
です。
.It Fl d
.Fl d
オプションは、ヘッダファイル
.Pa y.tab.h
を生成するよう指示します。
.It Fl l
もし
.Fl l
オプションが指定されていなければ、
.Nm yacc
は #line ディレクティブを生成したコードに挿入します。
#line ディレクティブは、生成されたコードの中のエラーとユーザのオ
リジナルコードとの関係を C コンパイラに知らせます。
もし
.Fl l
オプションが指定されていれば、
.Nm yacc
は #line ディレクティブを挿入しません。
ユーザによって指定された #line ディレクティブは保持されます。
.It Fl r
.Fl r
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm yacc
はコードとテーブルのファイルを分けて出力します。
コードファイル名は
.Pa y.code.c
となり、テーブルファイル名は
.Pa y.tab.c
となります。
.It Fl t
.Fl t
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm yacc
によって生成されるプリプロセッサディレクティブを変更し、デバッグ
用の文をコンパイルされたコードの中に埋め込みます。
.It Fl v
.Fl v
オプションを指定すると、生成されたパーザの詳細を人間に読める形式
で、ファイル
.Pa y.output
に出力します。
.Pp
.Sh 環境変数
以下の環境変数が
.Nm yacc
によって参照されます:
.Bl -tag -width TMPDIR
.It Ev TMPDIR
もし環境変数
.Ev TMPDIR
が設定されていれば、
.Ev TMPDIR
に設定されている文字列は、テンポラリファイルが生成されるディレク
トリ名として使用されます。
.El
.Sh テーブル
本バージョンの
.Nm yacc
によって生成されるテーブルの名称は、
.Dq yylhs ,
.Dq yylen ,
.Dq yydefred ,
.Dq yydgoto ,
.Dq yysindex ,
.Dq yyrindex ,
.Dq yygindex ,
.Dq yytable ,
そして
.Dq yycheck
です。さらに、追加のテーブルとして
.Dq yyname
および
.Dq yyrule
が、
.Dv YYDEBUG
が定義されゼロでないときに用意されます。
.Sh 関連ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /tmp/yacc.uXXXXXXXX -compact
.It Pa y.code.c
.It Pa y.tab.c
.It Pa y.tab.h
.It Pa y.output
.It Pa /tmp/yacc.aXXXXXX
.It Pa /tmp/yacc.tXXXXXX
.It Pa /tmp/yacc.uXXXXXX
.El
.Sh 診断
もしルールを切り詰めることができなかった場合、ルール数が標準出力
に書かれます。
もし、何らかの
.Tn LALR(1)
の衝突があった場合、衝突数も標準エラー出力に書かれます。
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr yyfix 1
.Sh 規格
.Nm yacc
ユーティリティは
.St -p1003.2
準拠です。
