.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 24 00:49:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH ypcat 1 "December 2001" "YP Tools 2.8"
.SH 名前
ypcat \- NIS データーベース中のすべてのキーと、その値を表示する
.SH 書式
.B ypcat
[
.BR \-kt
]
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.BI \-h " hostname"
]
.I mapname
.br
.B ypcat
.B \-x
.LP
.SH 説明
.B ypcat
は
.I mapname
で指定した NIS データーベースから、すべてのキーとその値とを表示する。
.I mapname
にはマップ名またはマップのニックネームを指定できる。
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
.BR domainname (1)
が返すデフォルトのドメイン以外を指定する。
.TP
.BI \-h " hostname"
.BR ypbind (8)
によって見つけられるデフォルトのホスト名以外を指定する。
.TP
.B \-k
マップのキーを表示する。このオプションは値が null のマップや、
キーが値の一部となっていないマップに対して便利である。
.TP
.B \-t
マップのニックネーム変換を抑制する。
.TP
.B \-x
マップのニックネームの変換テーブルを表示する。
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /var/yp/nicknames
マップのニックネームの変換テーブル。
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR nicknames (5),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yset (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.SH 著者
.B ypcat
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
