.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ypwhich 1 "May 1998" "YP Tools 2.8"
.SH 名前
ypwhich \- NIS サーバーまたはマップマスターの名前を返す。
.SH 書式
.B ypwhich
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.BR \-V "n"
]
[
.I hostname
]
.br
.B ypwhich
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.B \-t
]
.B \-m
[
.I mname
]
.br
.B ypwhich
.B \-x
.LP
.SH 説明
.B ypwhich
は NIS サービスをクライアントに与えている NIS サーバーの名前を返す。
またはマップに対するマスターを返す。
引数なしで起動されると、ローカルなマシンに対する NIS サーバを返す。
.I hostname
が指定されると、そのマシンの NIS マスターを問い合わせる。
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
デフォルトドメイン以外のドメインを指定する。
.TP
.B \-t
マップニックネームの変換を抑制する。
.TP
.BI \-m " mname"
指定したマップに対するマスターの NIS サーバーを探す。
.I hostname
を同時に指定することはできない。
.I mname
はマップの名前である。マップのニックネームでもよい。
.I mname
が省略された場合は、
.B ypwhich
は利用可能なマップのリストを生成する。
.TP
.B \-x
マップニックネームの変換テーブルを表示する。
.TP
.B \-Vn
.BR ypbind (8)
のバージョンを指定する。デフォルトは V2 である。

.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /var/yp/nicknames
マップのニックネームの変換テーブル。
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR nicknames (5),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yset (8)
.LP
.SH 著者
.B ypwhich
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
