.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun 10 15:41:46 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	truncate	切り詰める
.\"WORD:	limitation	制限
.\"
.TH ZFORCE 1
.SH 名前
zforce \- すべての gzip ファイルの拡張子を強制的に '.gz' にする
.SH 書式
.B zforce
[ name ...  ]
.SH 説明
.I  zforce
は
.I gzip
が (gzip ファイルを) 再び圧縮をしないように、
すべての
.I gzip
ファイルの拡張子を強制的に .gz にする。
これは、ファイル転送の後に名前が切り詰められてしまった場合に役立つ。
ファイル名に 14 文字の制限があるシステムでは、
拡張子 .gz の分を割くために元のファイル名が切り詰められる。
たとえば、12345678901234 は 12345678901.gz に名前が変更される。
foo.tgz のようなファイル名は変更されない。
.SH 関連項目
gzip(1), znew(1), zmore(1), zgrep(1), zdiff(1), gzexe(1)



