.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Gordon W. Ross
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: Id: bootparams.5,v 1.2 1994/10/03 19:26:13 gwr Exp
.\"     from: FreeBSD: bootparams.5,v 1.9 1999/08/28 01:15:39 peter Exp
.\"     $Id: bootparams.5,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd October 2, 1994
.Dt BOOTPARAMS 5
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.Sh 名前
.Nm bootparams
.Nd ブートパラメータのデータベース
.Sh 書式
.Nm /etc/bootparams
.Sh 説明
.Nm
ファイルは、ディスクレスクライアントが
ネットワーク越しにブートする際に要求する、
ブートパラメータを指定する。
このサーバがサポートするクライアントは、
.Nm
ファイルに
.Nm root
のパス名と (オプションとして)
.Nm swap
領域のパス名を記述したエントリを持たなければならない。
.Pp
ファイル中の (# で始まるコメント行以外の) 各行で、
クライアント名、それに続いて、クライアントが論理名で要求するパス名を指定する。
行中の要素は、空白かタブで区切られ、
バックスラッシュを使うことで複数行に続けることができる。
.Pp
例を以下に示す:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dummy	root=host:/export/dummy/root \\
	swap=host:/export/dummy/swap \\
	dump=host:/export/dummy/swap
.Ed
.Pp
"dummy" という名前のクライアントが
自らの論理 "root" を要求した場合、
この
.Tn RPC
リクエストに対する返答として、
パス名
.Dq Pa "host:/export/dummy/root"
が与えられる。
"host:" の部分は必ず指定しなければならない。
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /etc/bootparams -compact
.It Pa /etc/bootparams
デフォルトの設定ファイル
.El
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr bootparamd 8
.\" .Xr diskless 8
