.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 11:06:22 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 17:47:19 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996, 1998
.\"     Taro Morioka and NAKANO Takeo, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 29 Jun 1996 by Taro Morioka <morioka@i.h.kyoto-u.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Sat 25 Jul 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ISSUE 5 1993-07-24 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
issue \- ログイン前に表示されるメッセージとシステム情報のファイル
.SH 説明
\fI/etc/issue\fPファイルは、ログインプロンプトに先だって表示される、
メッセージやシステムの情報が書かれたテキストファイルである。
システムで採用されている
.BR getty 系の
プログラムによってサポートされている場合、
このファイルには \fB@\fP\fIchar\fP や \fB\e\fP\fIchar\fP などの
シーケンスが含まれていることもある。
.SH ファイル
/etc/issue
.SH 関連項目
.BR motd (5),
.BR agetty (8),
.BR mingetty (8)
