.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:08:16 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 17:47:19 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Hiroaki Nagoya all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Feb 4 1998 by Hiroaki Nagoya <nagoya@is.titech.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH MOTD 5 1992-12-29 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
motd \- 今日のお知らせ(message of the day)
.SH 説明
\fI/etc/motd\fP の内容は
.BR login (1)
によってログインが成功したあとで、ログインシェルが起動される前に
表示される。

略語 "motd" は "message of the day" をあらわしていて、このファイルは伝統的
にその名のとおりに使われている
(すべてのユーザーにメイルを送るよりも少ないディスク容量しか必要としない)。
.SH ファイル
/etc/motd
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR issue (5)
