.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Thu May 20 20:45:48 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:11:07 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Nov 21 10:49:38 1993 by Michael Haardt
.\" Modified Sun Feb 26 15:09:15 1995 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996-2000
.\"     Takashi ISHIOKA and NAKANO Takeo, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 9 Sep 1996 by Takashi ISHIOKA <ishioka@dad.eec.toshiba.co.jp>
.\" Modified Sat 25 Jul 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Mon 11 Dec 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SHELLS 5 1993-11-21 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
shells \- ログインシェルとして有効なファイルのパス名
.SH 説明
.I /etc/shells
はログインシェルとして有効なファイルのフルパスが書かれた
テキストファイルである。
.BR chsh (1)
はこのファイルを参照する。
他のプログラムもこのファイルを参照できる。
.PP
注意して欲しいのだが、プログラムによっては、
ユーザーが通常のユーザーかどうかを判断する際に、
このファイルの内容を参考にすることがある。
例えば ftp デーモンは、
ログインシェルがこのファイルに書かれていない
ユーザーからのアクセスを許さないのが以前から一般的である。
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/shells
.SH 例
.I /etc/shells
には以下のようなパスが含まれているだろう。
.sp
.RS
.I /bin/sh
.br
.I /bin/csh
.RE
.SH 関連項目
.BR chsh (1),
.BR getusershell (3)
