.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1998, 1999, 2002 Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This file is part of ypbind-mt.
.\"
.\" ypbind-mt is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
.\" License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" ypbind-mt is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with ypbind-mt; see the file COPYING.  If not,
.\" write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Oct 22 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 24 02:01:02 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	binding		バインド
.\"
.TH yp.conf 5 "April 2002" "ypbind-mt Version 1.16"
.SH 名前
/etc/yp.conf \- NIS バインドの設定ファイル
.SH 説明
.B /etc/yp.conf
ファイルは、
.BR ypbind (8)
が起動時と SIGHUP シグナルを受信したときに参照するファイルである。
ファイル中のエントリが最初のバインドに用いられる。
有効なエントリは以下の通り。

.B domain
.I nisdomain
.B server
.I hostname
.RS
ドメイン
.I nisdomain
の情報をサーバー
.I hostname
から取得する。
この指定は、一つのドメインに対して複数回行ってかまわない。
.RE

.B domain
.I nisdomain
.B broadcast
.RS
ドメイン
.I nisdomain
に対してはローカルネットにブロードキャストを行う。
.RE

.B ypserver
.I hostname
.RS
ローカルドメインの情報をサーバー
.I server
から取得する。
.RE

.B broadcast
.RS
サーバーが指定されない場合、
または指定された全てのサーバーが到達不能である場合、
サーバーを見つけるためにデフォルトドメインに対して
ブロードキャストを行う。
.RE

あるドメインに対してブロードキャストオプションと
特定のサーバーが指定された場合、
.BR ypbind-mt
は、動作しているサーバーに対してブロードキャストを行う前に、
最初は指定されたサーバーに対して情報の取得を試みる。
.SH 関連項目
.BR ypbind (8)
.SH 著者
.B ypbind-mt
は Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de> によって書かれた。
