.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)comsat.8	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: comsat.8,v 1.2 2000/12/14 09:58:59 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd July 31, 1999
.Dt COMSAT 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.Sh 名前
.Nm comsat
.Nd biff サーバ
.Sh 書式
.Nm comsat
.Sh 説明
.Nm comsat
は、受信メールのレポートを受け取り、
サービスを要求しているユーザーに対して通知を行う、サーバプロセスである。
.Nm comsat
は
.Dq biff
サービス仕様
.Ns ( Xr services 5
と
.Xr inetd 8
を参照) に関連するデータグラムポートのメッセージを受信する。
1 行メッセージは次の形式である:
.Pp
.Dl user@mailbox-offset
.Pp
ここで指定されているユーザー
.Em user
がシステムにログインしていて、
割り当てられた端末の所有者の実行ビットが
.Ns ( Dq Li biff y )
によって ON になっている場合、
.Em offset
がメールボックスファイルのシークオフセットとして使われ、
メッセージの先頭 7 行または先頭 560 文字がユーザーの端末に表示される。
.Dq From 
と
.Dq Subject
以外のメッセージヘッダの一部とみなされる行は、
表示される行には含まれない。
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/utmp -compact
.It Pa /var/run/utmp
誰がどの端末でログインしているかを見つけるためのファイル
.El
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr biff 1 ,
.Xr inetd 8
.Sh バグ
メッセージヘッダのフィルタリングは誤りがちである。
表示される情報の量は、理論的な最小限の量に近い。
.Pp
現在ログインしているマシンへのメール到着ではなく、
他のマシンにメールが届いたことがユーザーに通知されるべきである。
.Pp
通知は別のウインドウに表示されるべきである。
そうすれば、スクリーンの表示が乱されない。
.Pp
バグは、diff/patch・コンパイラエラー・
できる限り完全なバグレポートとともに、
netbug@ftp.uk.linux.org に送って下さい。
.Sh 履歴
.Nm
デーモンは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
