.\"/* Copyright 1988,1990,1993 by Paul Vixie
.\" * All rights reserved
.\" *
.\" * Distribute freely, except: don't remove my name from the source or
.\" * documentation (don't take credit for my work), mark your changes (don't
.\" * get me blamed for your possible bugs), don't alter or remove this
.\" * notice.  May be sold if buildable source is provided to buyer.  No
.\" * warrantee of any kind, express or implied, is included with this
.\" * software; use at your own risk, responsibility for damages (if any) to
.\" * anyone resulting from the use of this software rests entirely with the
.\" * user.
.\" *
.\" * Send bug reports, bug fixes, enhancements, requests, flames, etc., and
.\" * I'll try to keep a version up to date.  I can be reached as follows:
.\" * Paul Vixie          <paul@vix.com>          uunet!decwrl!vixie!paul
.\" */
.\" 
.\" $Id: cron.8,v 2.2 1993/12/28 08:34:43 vixie Exp $
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 SEKINE Tatsuo
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Tue May 15 20:09:48 JST 2001
.\"         by SEKINE Tatsuo <tsekine@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: modtime		最終修正時刻
.TH CRON 8 "20 December 1993"
.UC 4
.SH 名前
cron \- 予定されたコマンドを実行するデーモン(Vixie Cron)
.SH 書式
cron
.SH 説明
.I cron
は /etc/rc または /etc/rc.local から起動されるべきである。
すぐに(シェルに)戻るので、'&' を付けて起動する必要はない。
.PP
.I cron
は /etc/passwd にあるアカウントをファイル名に持つ crontab ファイルを
/var/cron/tabs
から探し、見つけた crontab ファイルをメモリに読み込む。
また
.I cron
は /etc/crontab も見る (このファイルのフォーマットは少々異なっている:
.IR crontab (5)
を参照)。
.I cron
は 1 分ごとに起きて、読み込まれた crontab ファイルを評価し、
それぞれのコマンドを今起動すべきかどうかチェックする。
コマンドを実行すると、全ての出力を crontab ファイルの所有者にメールする
(または MAILTO 環境変数が crontab ファイルにあれば、
そこで指定されたユーザーに送る)。
.PP
さらに
.I cron
は 1 分ごとにスプールディレクトリ(または
.I /etc/crontab
ファイル)の最終修正時刻(modtime)をチェックし、もし変更されていれば、
すべての crontab ファイルの最終修正時刻をチェックし、
変更された crontab ファイルを読み直す。
よって crontab ファイルを修正するたびに
.I cron
を再起動する必要はない。
.IR crontab (1)
コマンドは、crontab ファイルが変更されたかどうかにかかわらず、
スプールディレクトリの最終修正時刻を更新することに注意せよ。
.SH 関連項目
crontab(1), crontab(5)
.SH 著者
.nf
Paul Vixie <paul@vix.com>
