.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\"  published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 27 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH domainname 8 "May 1999" "YP Tools 2.8"
.SH 名前
domainname \- 現在のドメイン名を設定・表示する
.br
nisdomainname \- 現在の NIS(YP) ドメイン名を設定・表示する
.br
ypdomainname \- 現在の NIS(YP) ドメイン名を設定・表示する
.SH 書式
.B domainname
[
.B domain
]
.br
.B nisdomainname
[
.B domain
]
.br
.B ypdomainname
[
.B domain
]
.LP
.SH 説明
引数なしで実行すると、
.B domainname
は現在のシステムの NIS ドメイン名を表示する。
.B domainname
は
.BR getdomainname (2)
関数を用いてドメイン名を取得し、
.B nisdomainname
と
.B ypdomainname
は
.BR yp_get_default_domain (3)
を用いる。
.PP
スーパーユーザーならば、引数として
.B domain
を指定し、ドメインの名前をこれに変更することができる。
これを行う際には、 3 つのプログラムすべてが
.BR setdomainname (2)
を用いる。
.SH 関連項目
.BR getdomainname (2),
.BR setdomainname (2),
.BR yp_get_default_domain (3),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR ypwhich (1),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yset (8)
.LP
.SH 著者
.B domainname
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
