.\"$Id: pwauth.8,v 1.8 2002/03/08 04:39:11 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1992, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Sun 22 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PWAUTH 8
.\"nakano 多分 section 7 のほうが適切な気がする。
.SH 名前
pwauth \- 管理者が設定するパスワード認証
.SH 説明
システム管理者は、
ユーザの個人認証に用いられるプログラムのリストを定義できる。
それらのプログラムは
\fI/etc/passwd\fR もしくは \fI/etc/shadow\fR
ファイル中にある、暗号化されたパスワードの代わりに指定する。
ユーザアカウントを管理するユーティリティは、
暗号化パスワードのフィールドを調べ、
そのユーザに対してシステム管理者が
認証プログラムを設定しているかどうか判断する。
これらの管理プログラムのいずれかが、
変更しようとしているユーザに認証プログラムが設定されていると判断した場合は、
常に \fBpw_auth\fR 関数が呼び出される。
.PP
最初のエントリは \fBuseradd\fR コマンドにより生成される。
認証情報の変更やユーザアカウントの削除といった変更が発生すると、
\fBpw_auth\fR 関数が呼び出される。
この関数は各ユーザアカウントの認証情報を最新に保つ。
.PP
認証プログラムは実際のログインセッションや
ネットワークセッションを開始しない。
認証プログラムからの終了コードが、
その処理が許可されたかどうかの判断に用いられる。
呼び出したプロセスには、
ログインセッション・ネットワークセッションを生成できるだけの、
適切な特権がなければならない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR su (1),
.BR pw_auth (3),
.BR useradd (8),
.BR userdel (8),
.BR usermod (8)
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
