.\"
.\" Original manual page is a part of nfs-server package.
.\" Following is a exerpt from README of version 2.2beta37.
.\" 
.\" 7.  Copyright
.\" 
.\" Much of the code in this package was originally  written  by
.\" Mark Shand, and is placed under the following copyright:
.\" 
.\"    This  software may be used for any purpose provided
.\"    the above  copyright  notice  is  retained.  It  is
.\"    supplied  as  is,  with  no warranties expressed or
.\"    implied.
.\" 
.\" Other code, especially that written by Rick Sladkey and some
.\" replacement routines included from the GNU libc, are covered
.\" by the GNU General Public License, version 2,  or  (at  your
.\" option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Copyright 1993 Rick Sladkey <jrs@world.std.com>
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 11 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SHOWMOUNT 8 "11 August 1997"
.SH 名前
showmount \- NFS サーバのマウント情報を表示する。
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B /usr/sbin/showmount
.B "[\ \-adehv\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-all\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-directories\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-exports\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-help\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-version\ ]"
.B "[\ host\ ]"
.ad b
.SH 説明
.B showmout
はリモートホストの mount デーモンに問い合わせ、そのマシンの
NFS サーバの情報について尋ねる。オプションを指定しないと、
.B showmount
はそのホストからマウントを行っているクライアントの一覧をリストする。
.B showmount
の出力は、 ``sort -u'' の作業をしてから表示されるようになっている。
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a " または " \-\-all
クライアントのホスト名とマウントされたディレクトリの両方を
host:dir 形式でリストする。
.TP
.BR \-d " または " \-\-directories
あるクライアントからマウントされているディレクトリだけを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-e " または " \-\-exports
NFS サーバーのエクスポートリストを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-h " または " \-\-help
ヘルプの短い要約を表示する。
.TP
.BR \-v " または " \-\-version
プログラムの現在のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-no\-headers
出力からヘッダ情報を取り去る。
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.mountd (8),
.BR rpc.nfsd (8)
.SH バグ
.B showmount
が表示する情報の完全性・正確性は、 NFS サーバーの実装に依存する。
.P
.B showmount
は出力を uniq, sort するので、クライアントが同じディレクトリを
複数マウントしているかどうかは判別できない。
.SH 著者
Rick Sladkey <jrs@world.std.com>
