.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, 
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Daniel Jacobowitz <dan@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese version copyright (c) 2003
.\"    System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd. All rights reserved
.\" 
.\" Translated on Fri May  2 13:41:33 JST 2003 JST
.\"     by System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd <info@sdri.co.jp>
.Dd March 8, 2001
.Dt VSFTPD 8
.Sh 名前
.Nm vsftpd
.Nd とても安全な FTP デーモン
.Sh 書式
.Nm vsftpd
.Op Ar 設定ファイル
.Sh 説明
.Nm vsftpd
とは Very Secure File Transfer Protocol Daemon
(;とても安全なファイル転送プロトコルデーモン)のことである。
サーバーは
.Xr inetd 8
や
.Xr xinetd 8
のような
.Dq スーパーサーバー
から起動することができる。
別の手段として、スタンドアロンモードで起動することもできる。
その場合には、vsftpd は自力でネットワークからの接続を待ち受ける。
後者のモードの方が簡単に利用でき、また望ましくもある。
このモードは、
.Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf
ファイルにおいて
.Pa listen=YES
と設定することで有効になる。
.Nm vsftpd
を直接実行した場合には、クライアントからの接続を受け付ける準備ができた状態で
FTP サービスを起動する。
.Op 設定ファイルは
コマンドラインで指定することができる。
デフォルトの設定ファイルは
.Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf
である。
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr vsftpd.conf 5
