.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Portions of the code documented by this man page are 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\" Please see the file COPYING for details.
.\"
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)fingerd.8	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"     from: fingerd.8,v 1.1 1994/06/08 15:12:24 rzsfl Exp rzsfl
.\"	$Id: writed.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Rewritten as writed.8, Apr 29 1996, dholland@hcs.harvard.edu
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:16:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd April 29, 1996
.Dt WRITED 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.Sh 名前
.Nm writed
.Nd リモートの write サーバ
.Sh 書式
.Nm writed
.Sh 説明
.Nm writed
は、あるホスト上の
.Xr write 1
プログラムが別のホスト上の
.Xr write 1
プログラムと接続し、ネットワークを経由して通信するための、
非常に簡単なプロトコルの実装である。
プロトコルの詳細は、不正な使用をさせないため、
この man ページでは故意に説明していない。
.Pp
.Nm writed
は、
.Xr inetd 8
から起動され、ポート番号 811 で
.Tn TCP
リクエストの接続を待つことになっている。
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr write 1
.Sh バグ
.Tn TIP
からサーバへ直接接続した場合や、
それと同じくらい見識の狭い
.Tn TELNET
プロトコルを使ったユーザープログラムでの接続した場合、
無意味なオプションネゴシエーションをサーバに送ることになり、
コマンド行の解釈を混乱させる。
.Nm writed
は、
.Tn IAC
をフィルタするべきである。
さらに、受信した全てのオプションコマンドに対して
.Pq Tn IAC WON'T
でネガティブに応答するべきかもしれない。
.Pp
ユーザーがメッセージを送るのに、出所の正しさを決定しようとはしない。
.Sh 履歴
.Nm
コマンドは、プロジェクト Athena と協力して MIT で開発された。
このコマンドは、基本的には
.Xr fingerd 8
をハックしたものである。
