.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 24 01:12:40 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH yptest 8 "May 2002" "YP Tools 2.8"
.SH 名前
yptest - NIS の設定をテストする
.SH 書式
.B yptest [\fB-q\fR] [\fB-d \fIdomain\fR] [\fB-h \fIhost\fR] [\fB-m \fImap\fR] [\fB-u \fIuser\fR]
.LP
.SH 説明
.BR yptest
は様々な NIS 機能を呼び出し、
NIS の設定が正しいかと、期待通りに動作しているかをチェックする。
.LP
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-q
寡黙にして、メッセージを表示しない。
.TP
.BI \-d " domainname"
.BR domainname (1)
が返すデフォルトのドメイン以外を指定する。
このオプションは全てのテストでサポートされているわけではない。
.TP
.BI \-h " hostname"
現在使っている ypserv ではなく、
.I hostname
上の ypserv に問い合わせる。
このオプションは全てのテストでサポートされているわけではない。
.TP
.BI \-m " map"
マップとして
.I passwd.byname
ではなく
.I map
を用いてテストする。
このオプションは、デフォルトのマップが存在しない場合に使用すべきである。
.TP
.BI \-u " user"
アカウントとして
.I nobody
ではなく
.I user
を使う。
このオプションは、テストに使うマップ
.RI ( passwd.byname
または
.B \-m
オプションで指定されたもの) に
.I nobody
アカウントが存在しない場合に使用すべきである。
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (8),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.SH 著者
.B yptest
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
