.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified 1997-01-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1997-07-30 by Paul Slootman <paul@wurtel.demon.nl>
.\" Modified 2004-05-27 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-17, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified 2001-06-12,Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified 2004-12-28, Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-07-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.34
.\"
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	algorithm		アルゴリズム
.\"WORD:	update			更新
.\"WORD:	parameter		パラメーター
.\"WORD:	field			フィールド
.\"WORD:	super user		スーパー・ユーザー
.\"WORD:	timer			タイマー
.\"WORD:	interrupt		割り込み
.\"WORD:	memory			メモリ
.\"
.TH ADJTIMEX 2 2004-05-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
adjtimex \- カーネルの時計を調整する
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/timex.h>
.sp
.BI "int adjtimex(struct timex *" "buf" );
.SH 説明
Linux は David L. Mill の時計調節アルゴリズムを使用している
(RFC\ 1305 を参照)。
システムコール
.BR adjtimex ()
はこのアルゴリズムの調節のパラメーターを読み取ったり、設定したりする。
この関数は
.I timex
構造体へのポインターを受け取り、その値でカーネルのパラメーターを更新して、
同じ構造体に現在のカーネルの値を返す。
この構造体は以下のように宣言される:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct timex {
    int modes;           /* mode selector */
    long offset;         /* time offset (usec) */
    long freq;           /* frequency offset (scaled ppm) */
.\" FIXME -- what is the scaling unit?  2^16 ?
    long maxerror;       /* maximum error (usec) */
    long esterror;       /* estimated error (usec) */
    int status;          /* clock command/status */
    long constant;       /* pll time constant */
    long precision;      /* clock precision (usec) (read-only) */
    long tolerance;      /* clock frequency tolerance (ppm)
                            (read-only) */
    struct timeval time; /* current time (read-only) */
    long tick;           /* usecs between clock ticks */
};
.fi
.in
.PP
.I modes
フィールドは (必要に応じて) どのパラメーターを設定するか決定する。
それは以下のビット値の 0 個以上の
.RI "ビット " OR
からなる:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
#define ADJ_OFFSET            0x0001 /* time offset */
#define ADJ_FREQUENCY         0x0002 /* frequency offset */
#define ADJ_MAXERROR          0x0004 /* maximum time error */
#define ADJ_ESTERROR          0x0008 /* estimated time error */
#define ADJ_STATUS            0x0010 /* clock status */
#define ADJ_TIMECONST         0x0020 /* pll time constant */
#define ADJ_TICK              0x4000 /* tick value */
#define ADJ_OFFSET_SINGLESHOT 0x8001 /* old-fashioned adjtime() */
.fi
.in
.PP
通常のユーザーは
.I mode
の値は 0 に制限されている。
スーパー・ユーザーのみが全てのパラメーターを設定できる。
.br
.ne 12v
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、
.BR adjtimex ()
は
クロックの状態を返す:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
#define TIME_OK  0 /* clock synchronized */
#define TIME_INS 1 /* insert leap second */
#define TIME_DEL 2 /* delete leap second */
#define TIME_OOP 3 /* leap second in progress */
#define TIME_BAD 4 /* clock not synchronized */
.fi
.in
.PP
失敗した場合は
.BR adjtimex ()
は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
が設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I buf
が書き込み可能なメモリを指していない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I buf.offset
へ \-131071 〜 +131071 の範囲以外の値を設定しようとしたか、
.I buf.status
に上記以外の値を設定しようとしたか、
.I buf.tick
に
.RB 900000/ HZ
〜
.RB 1100000/ HZ
の範囲以外の値を設定しようとした。
ここで
.B HZ
はシステムのタイマー割り込みの周期である。
.TP
.B EPERM
.I buf.mode
が 0 でなく、かつ呼び出し元が十分な特権を持っていない。
Linux では
.B CAP_SYS_TIME
ケーパビリティが必要である。
.SH 準拠
.BR adjtimex ()
は Linux 特有であり、
移植を意図したプログラムで使用すべきではない。
システムクロックを調整する方法で、
移植性があるが自由度は劣る方法については
.BR adjtime (3)
を参照のこと。
.SH 関連項目
.BR settimeofday (2),
.BR adjtime (3),
.BR capabilities (7),
.BR time (7)
