.\" Written by Ralf Baechle (ralf@waldorf-gmbh.de),
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Waldorf GMBH
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 22 20:07:45 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.55
.\"
.\"WORD:	instruction cache	命令キャッシュ
.\"WORD:	data cache		データキャッシュ
.\"WORD:	flush			フラッシュ
.\"
.TH CACHEFLUSH 2 2007-05-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
cacheflush \- 命令キャッシュやデータキャッシュの内容をフラッシュする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <asm/cachectl.h>
.sp
.BI "int cacheflush(char *" addr ", int "nbytes ", int "cache );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR cacheflush ()
は
.I addr
から
.I (addr+nbytes-1)
の範囲のユーザアドレスに対応する
指定されたキャッシュをフラッシュする。
.I cache
には以下のいずれかを指定する:
.TP
.B ICACHE
命令 (instruction) キャッシュをフラッシュする。
.TP
.B DCACHE
変更があったキャッシュラインをメモリに書き戻し、無効にする。
.TP
.B BCACHE
.B (ICACHE|DCACHE)
と同じ。
.SH 返り値
.BR cacheflush ()
は成功した場合は 0 を、失敗した場合は \-1 を返す。エラーが検出された場合は
.I errno
にエラーが指示される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I addr
から
.I (addr+nbytes-1)
の範囲のアドレスの全てまたは一部が
アクセス可能ではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I cache
パラメータが
.BR ICACHE ,
.BR DCACHE , 
.B BCACHE
のどれでもない。
.SH 準拠
この Linux 特有のシステムコールは MIPS ベースのシステムでのみ有効である。
.\" FIXME This system call was only on MIPS back in 1.2 days, but
.\" by now it is on a number of other architectures (but not i386).
.\" Investigate the details and update this page.
移植を意図したプログラムで使用すべきではない。
.\" Irix 6.5 appears to have a cacheflush() syscall -- mtk
.SH バグ
現在の実装では、引き数
.I addr
と
.I nbytes
は無視される。そのため、
常に全てのキャッシュがフラッシュされる。
