.\" Copyright (C) 2004 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jan 22 22:18:14 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH EXIT_GROUP 2 2008-11-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
exit_group \- プロセス中の全てのスレッドを exit させる
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "void exit_group(int " status );
.fi
.SH 説明
このシステムコールは、基本的に
.BR exit (2)
と等しいが、
呼び出し元のスレッドだけでなく、呼び出し元のプロセスのスレッドグループに
ある全てのスレッドを終了させる点が異なる。
.SH 返り値
このシステムコールは値を返さない。
.SH バージョン
このコールは、Linux 2.5.35 以降に存在する。
.SH 注意
glibc 2.3 以降では、
.BR exit (2)
のラッパー関数が呼び出された際に、
このシステムコールが起動される。
.SH 準拠
このコールは Linux 独自である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR exit (2)
