.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-09-30 by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\"
.TH FUTIMESAT 2 2009-12-13 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
futimesat \- ディレクトリファイルディスクリプタから相対的な位置にあるファイルのタイムスタンプを変更する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>           /* AT_* 定数の定義 */
.sp
.BI "int futimesat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ,
.BI "              const struct timeval " times [2]);
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR futimesat ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
glibc 2.10 より前:
_ATFILE_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.SH 説明
このシステムコールは廃止予定である。
代わりに
.BR utimensat (2)
を使用すること。

.BR futimesat ()
システムコールは、この man ページで説明している違いがある以外は、
.BR utimes (2)
と全く同じように動作する。

.I pathname
で指定されるパス名が相対パス名である場合、
ファイルディスクリプタ
.I dirfd
で参照されるディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される
.RB ( utimes (2)
では、相対パスは呼び出し元プロセスの
カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パスとなる)。

.I pathname
が相対パスであり、かつ
.I dirfd
が特別な値
.B AT_FDCWD
である場合、
.I pathname
は
.RB ( utimes (2)
と同じように) 呼び出し元プロセスの
カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される。

.I pathname
が絶対パスである場合、
.I dirfd
は無視される。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、
.BR futimesat ()
は 0 を返す。
エラーの場合、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
にはエラーを示す値が設定される。
.SH エラー
.BR utimes (2)
と同じエラーが
.BR futimesat ()
でも起こる。
.BR futimesat ()
では、その他に以下のエラーが起こる:
.TP
.B EBADF
.I dirfd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタでない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.I pathname
が相対パスで、かつ
.I dirfd
がディレクトリ以外のファイルを参照するファイルディスクリプタである。
.SH バージョン
.BR futimesat ()
は Linux カーネル 2.6.16 で追加された。
.SH 準拠
このシステムコールは標準的ではない。
POSIX.1 で提案されていた仕様に由来して実装されたが、
その仕様は
.BR utimensat (2)
で置き換えられた。

Solaris には、これと同じようなシステムコールが存在する。
.SH 注意
.SS GLIBC についての注意
.I pathname
が NULL の場合、glibc の
.BR futimesat ()
ラッパー関数は
.I dirfd
で参照されるファイルの時刻を更新する。
.\" The Solaris futimesat() also has this strangeness.
.SH 関連項目
.BR stat (2),
.BR utimensat (2),
.BR utimes (2),
.BR futimes (3),
.BR path_resolution (7)
