.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getpeername.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:37:50 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Thu Jul 30 14:37:50 1993 by Martin Schulze <joey@debian.org>
.\" Modified Sun Mar 28 21:26:46 1999 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 17 Jul 2002, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"	Added 'socket' to NAME, so that "man -k socket" will show this page.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Apr  3 14:53:19 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Nov 26 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	connect			接続
.\"WORD:	peer			相手
.\"WORD:	socket			ソケット
.\"WORD:	buffer			バッファ
.\"WORD:	descriptor		ディスクリプタ
.\"WORD:	argument		引き数
.\"
.TH GETPEERNAME 2 2008-12-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
getpeername \- 接続している相手ソケットの名前を取得する
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int getpeername(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" addr \
", socklen_t *" addrlen );
.SH 説明
.BR getpeername ()
は、ソケット(socket)
.I sockfd
に接続している相手のアドレスを、
.I addr
が指すバッファに格納して返す。
.I addrlen
引き数は、
.I addr
が指している領域のサイズに初期化しておかなければならない。
関数が返る時には、
.I addrlen
には実際に返された名前のサイズが (バイト単位で) 格納される。
提供されたバッファが小さすぎた場合には、名前は切り詰められる。

渡されたバッファが小さ過ぎた場合は、返されるアドレスの末尾が切り詰められる。
この場合には、
.I addrlen
には、呼び出し時に指定された値よりも大きな値が格納される。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
を適切に設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
引き数
.I sockfd
が有効なディスクリプタでない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I addr
引き数の指しているメモリが有効なプロセスのアドレス空間の
一部でない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I addrlen
が不正である (例えば、負で場合など)。
.TP
.B ENOBUFS
この操作を行なうのに十分な資源がシステムに存在しない。
.TP
.B ENOTCONN
ソケットが接続していない。
.TP
.B ENOTSOCK
引き数
.I sockfd
がソケットでなくてファイルである。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.4BSD
.RB ( getpeername ()
関数は 4.2BSD で登場した), POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
.BR getpeername ()
の三番目の引き数は実際には
.I `int *'
である (4.x BSD, libc4, libc5 では
このようになっている)。
POSIX では紆余曲折を経て現在の
.I socklen_t
になっており、
glibc でも
.I socklen_t
を使っている。
.BR accept (2)
も参照のこと。
.SH 関連項目
.BR accept (2),
.BR bind (2),
.BR getsockname (2),
.BR ip (7),
.BR socket (7),
.BR unix (7)
