.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from linux/mm/swap.c:
.\"                Copyright (C) 1991, 1992  Linus Torvalds
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 21 Aug 1994 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added text about calling restriction (new in kernel 1.1.20 I believe).
.\"   N.B. calling "idle" from user process used to hang process!
.\" Modified Thu Oct 31 14:41:15 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" "
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jun 26 20:42:09 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Jan  3 18:16:36 JST 2000
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	Linux-specific		Linux 特有
.\"WORK:	portable		移植
.\"
.TH IDLE 2 1994-08-21 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
idle \- ID 0 のプロセスをアイドル状態にする
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B int idle(void);
.SH 説明
.BR idle ()
はブートストラップ時に使用される、内部システムコールである。
プロセスのページをスワップ可能に設定し、優先度を下げ、メインのスケジュー
ル処理のためのループへ移行する。
従って
.BR idle ()
は return することはない。
.PP
ID 0 のプロセスのみが
.BR idle ()
を使用することができる。
他のユーザープロセスはたとえそれがスーパーユーザー権限を持っていたとして
も
.B EPERM
を受け取る。
.SH 返り値
.BR idle ()
ID 0 のプロセスに対しては return しない。それ以外のユーザープロセスには
常に \-1 を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
ユーザープロセスには常にこの値をセットする。
.SH バージョン
2.3.13 以降、もはやこのシステムコールは存在しない。
.SH 準拠
この関数は Linux 特有の関数であり、移植性を持たせたいプログラムには使
用すべきでない。
