.\" man2/inotify_init.2 - inotify_init man page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2005 Robert Love
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 2005-07-19 Robert Love <rlove@rlove.org> - initial version
.\" 2006-02-07 mtk, minor changes
.\" 2008-10-10 mtk: add description of inotify_init1()
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-08-15, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\" Updated 2008-11-10, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.12
.\"
.TH INOTIFY_INIT 2 2008-10-10 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
inotify_init, inotify_init1 \- inotify インスタンスを初期化する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/inotify.h>
.sp
.B "int inotify_init(void);"
.BI "int inotify_init1(int " flags );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR inotify_init ()
は、新規の inotify インスタンスを初期化し、作成された inotify イベントキュー
に対応するファイルディスクリプタを返す。

.BR inotify_init1 ()
は、
.I flags
が 0 の場合、
.BR inotify_init ()
と同じである。
.I flags
に以下の値をビット毎の論理和 (OR) で指定することで、
異なる動作をさせることができる。
.TP 12
.B IN_NONBLOCK
新しく生成されるオープンファイル記述 (open file description) の
BR O_NONBLOCK
ファイルステータスフラグをセットする。
このフラグを使うことで、
.B O_NONBLOCK
をセットするために
.BR fcntl (2)
を追加で呼び出す必要がなくなる。
.TP
.B IN_CLOEXEC
新しいファイル・ディスクリプターに対して
close-on-exec
.RB ( FD_CLOEXEC )
フラグをセットする。
このフラグが役に立つ理由については、
.BR open (2)
の
.B O_CLOEXEC
フラグの説明を参照のこと。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらのシステムコールは新しいファイルディスクリプタを返す。
エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
をエラーを示す値に設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.RB ( inotify_init1 ())
無効な値が
.I flags
に指定された。
.TP
.B EMFILE
inotify インスタンスの総数がユーザ単位の上限に達していた。
.TP
.B ENFILE
inotify インスタンスの総数がシステムの上限に達していた。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
カーネルメモリが十分になかった。
.SH バージョン
.BR inotify_init ()
は Linux 2.6.13 で初めて登場した。
.BR inotify_init1 ()
は Linux 2.6.27 で追加された。
.SH 準拠
これらのシステムコールは Linux 独自である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR inotify_add_watch (2),
.BR inotify_rm_watch (2),
.BR inotify (7)
