.\" man2/inotify_rm_watch.2 - inotify_rm_watch man page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2005 Robert Love
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 2005-07-19 Robert Love <rlove@rlove.org> - initial version
.\" 2006-02-07 mtk, minor changes
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-08-15, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\"
.\" WORD:	watch			監視アイテム
.\" WORD:	watch descriptor	監視対象ディスクリプタ
.\"
.TH INOTIFY_RM_WATCH 2 2010-10-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
inotify_rm_watch \- inotify インスタンスから既存の監視アイテムを削除する
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/inotify.h>
.sp
.BI "int inotify_rm_watch(int " fd ", int " wd );
.\" Before glibc 2.10, the second argument was types as uint32_t.
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=7040
.SH 説明
.BR inotify_rm_watch ()
は、監視対象ディスクリプタ (watch descriptor)
.I wd
に対応する監視アイテムを、
ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
に対応する inotify インスタンスから削除する。

監視対象を削除すると、
この監視対象ディスクリプタに対して
.B IN_IGNORED
イベントが生成される
.RB ( inotify (7)
参照)。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、
.BR inotify_rm_watch ()
は 0 を返す。
エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
を適切に設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
監視対象ディスクリプタ
.I wd
が有効でない。もしくは、
.I fd
が inotify ファイルディスクリプタではない。
.SH バージョン
inotify は Linux カーネル 2.6.13 に組み込まれた。
.SH 準拠
このシステムコールは Linux 独自である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR inotify_add_watch (2),
.BR inotify_init (2),
.BR inotify (7)
