.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 16:13:46 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-09-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.64
.\"
.\"WORD:	IPC			IPC
.\"WORD:	message			メッセージ
.\"WORD:	semaphore		セマフォー
.\"WORD:	shared memory		共有メモリ
.\"WORD:	entry point		エントリ・ポイント
.\"WORD:	argument		引き数
.\"WORD:	hacker			ハッカー
.\"WORD:	standart library	標準ライブラリ
.\"WORD:	implement		実装
.\"
.TH IPC 2 2007-06-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ipc \- System V IPC システム・コール
.SH 書式
.nf
.BI "int ipc(unsigned int " call ", int " first ", int " second \
", int " third ,
.BI "        void *" ptr ", long " fifth );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR ipc ()
は メッセージ、セマフォー、共有メモリに関する System V IPC コールの
共通のカーネルへのエントリ・ポイントである。
.I call
はどの IPC 関数を呼び出すかを決め；
他の引き数は適切なコールへと渡される。
.PP
ユーザー・プログラムは通常の名前で適切な関数を呼び出すべきである。
標準ライブラリの実装者やカーネル・ハッカーのみが
.BR ipc ()
について知る必要がある。
.SH 準拠
.BR ipc ()
は Linux 特有であり、 移植を意図したプログラムでは
使用してはいけない。
.SH 注意
ia64 などのいくつかのアーキテクチャでは、システムコール
.BR ipc ()
が存在しない。実際には、その代わりに
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR shmctl (2)
などが独立したシステムコールとして実装されている。
.SH 関連項目
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR msgget (2),
.BR msgrcv (2),
.BR msgsnd (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR semget (2),
.BR semop (2),
.BR shmat (2),
.BR shmctl (2),
.BR shmdt (2),
.BR shmget (2)
