.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)killpg.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 21:55:01 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-16 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on CAP_KILL
.\" Modified 2004-06-21 by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 17 14:10:42 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako <tanisako@osa.dec-j.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Feb  5 21:24:32 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	process group		プロセス・グループ
.\"WORD:	signal			シグナル
.\"WORD:	effective user ID	実効ユーザーID
.\"WORD:	super-user		スーパー・ユーザー
.\"
.TH KILLPG 2 2010-09-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
killpg \- シグナルをプロセス・グループに送る
.SH 書式
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int killpg(int " pgrp ", int " sig );
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.TP 4
.BR killpg ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
.ad
.SH 説明
.BR killpg ()
は
.I sig
で指定したシグナルを
.I pgrp
で指定したプロセス・グループに送る。
シグナルの定義の一覧は
.BR signal (7)
を参照のこと。

引き数
.I pgrp
に 0 を指定した場合には
.BR killpg ()
は呼び出し元のプロセスが属しているプロセス・グループに対してシグナルを送る。
(POSIX では以下のように記述されている:
.I pgrp
が 1 以下である場合、動作は未定義である。)

プロセスがシグナルを送信する許可を持つためには、
プロセスが特権 (Linux では
.B CAP_KILL
ケーパビリティ (capability)) を持つか、
送信元プロセスの実ユーザー ID または実効ユーザー ID が
送信先プロセスの実 set-user-ID または保存 set-user-ID と
等しくなければならない。
.B SIGCONT
の場合、送信プロセスと受信プロセスが
同じセッションに属していれば十分である。
.SH 返り値
正常終了すると 0 が返り値となる。異常終了の場合 \-1 が返り値となり
.I errno
に原因コードが設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I sig
で指定された値は無効なシグナル番号である。
.TP
.B EPERM
プロセスに何れかの送信先プロセスにシグナルを送信する許可がない。
.TP
.B ESRCH
.I pgrp
で指定されたプロセス・グループに属するプロセスが存在しなかった。
.TP
.B ESRCH
プロセス・グループとして 0 が指定されたが、送信プロセスは
プロセス・グループを持っていない。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.4BSD
.RB ( killpg ()
は 4BSD で初めて追加された), POSIX.1-2001。
.SH 注意
BSD 系システムと System V 系システムでは、
許可のチェックに様々な違いがある。
.BR kill (2)
についての POSIX の原理 (rationale) を参照すること。
POSIX で記述されていない違いとしては、返り値
.B EPERM
がある。
BSD では「送信先プロセスの許可のチェックが 1 つでも失敗した場合は、
シグナルが送信されず、
.B EPERM
が返される」と記述されている。
POSIX では「送信先プロセスの許可のチェックが全て失敗した場合にのみ、
.B EPERM
が返される」と記述されている。

Linux では、
.BR killpg ()
はライブラリ関数として実装されており、
.I "kill(-pgrp,\ sig)"
の呼び出しが行われる。
.SH 関連項目
.BR getpgrp (2),
.BR kill (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR credentials (7),
.BR capabilities (7)
