.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Written 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified Thu Oct 31 15:16:23 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 16:22:27 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jun  2 18:27:49 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  6 17:05:03 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Dec 31 00:50:01 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:	offset			オフセット
.\"WORD:	descriptor		ディスクリプター
.\"WORD:	argument		引き数
.\"WORD:	open			オープン
.\"WORD:	support			サポート
.\"
.TH LLSEEK 2 2007-06-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
_llseek \- ファイルの読み書きオフセットの位置を変える
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int _llseek(unsigned int " fd ", unsigned long " offset_high ,
.BI "            unsigned long " offset_low ", loff_t *" result ,
.BI "            unsigned int " whence );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR _llseek ()
関数は、ファイル・ディスクリプター (descriptor)
.I fd
に関連づけられたオープンされたファイルのオフセットの位置を、相対的に
.I (offset_high<<32) | offset_low
バイトだけ変更する。
基準となる位置を表す
.I  whence
には
.BR SEEK_SET ,
.BR SEEK_CUR ,
.B SEEK_END
のいずれかを指定し、それぞれ
ファイルの先頭、ファイルの現在位置、
ファイルの最後を表す。
結果のファイル位置を
.I result
引き数に返す。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は、
.BR _llseek ()
は 0 を返す。
そうでなれば \-1 という値が返り、エラーを示す
.I errno
が設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
がオープンされたファイル・ディスクリプターでない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
結果をユーザ空間にコピーするときに問題があった。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I whence
が不正である。
.SH 準拠
この関数は Linux 特有であり、移植性の必要なプログラムでは使用してはいけない。
.SH 注意
glibc はこのシステムコールに対するラッパー関数を提供していない。
.BR syscall (2)
を使って呼び出すこと。
.SH 関連項目
.BR lseek (2),
.BR lseek64 (3)
