.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2003 John Levon <levon@movementarian.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2003-06-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-09-30, Akihiro MOTOKI
.\" Updated 2005-02-10, Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"
.\"WORD:	opaque identifier	内部識別子
.\"WORD:	Linux specific		Linux 独自
.\"WORD:	capability		ケーパビリティ
.\"
.TH LOOKUP_DCOOKIE 2 2004-06-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
lookup_dcookie \- ディレクトリ・エントリのパス名を返す
.SH 書式
.BI "int lookup_dcookie(u64 " cookie ", char *" buffer ", size_t " len );
.SH 説明
.I cookie
値で指定されたディレクトリ・エントリのフルパス名を検索する。
cookie は、個々のディレクトリ・エントリを区別する内部識別子 (opaque
identifier) である。引き数で指定されたバッファに、ディレクトリ・エントリの
フルパス名が格納される。

.BR lookup_dcookie ()
が正常に値を返すためには、カーネルがディレクトリ・エントリへの cookie 参照を
保持していなければならない。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、
.BR lookup_dcookie ()
はバッファにコピーしたパス文字列の長さを返す。
エラーの場合は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に適切な値を設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
バッファが有効でなかった。
.TP
.B EINVAL
検索が行われた時、cookie とディレクトリ・エントリのマッピングがカーネルに
登録されていなかったか、または cookie が有効なディレクトリ・エントリを
参照していない。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
名前がバッファに入り切らなかった。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
カーネルが、パス名を保持する一時バッファ用のメモリを割り当てることが
できなかった。
.TP
.B EPERM
プロセスが cookie 値を検索するのに必要なケーパビリティ
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
を持っていない。
.TP
.B ERANGE
バッファが、ディレクトリ・エントリのパス名を収容するのに
十分な大きさではなかった。
.SH バージョン
Linux 2.5.43 以降で利用できる。
エラー
.B ENAMETOOLONG
を返す仕様は 2.5.70 で追加された。
.SH 準拠
.BR lookup_dcookie ()
は Linux 独自の関数である。
.SH 注意
.BR lookup_dcookie ()
は特殊な用途に使われるシステムコールで、現在のところ oprofile profiler で
使われているだけである。

指定されたディレクトリ・エントリが削除されていた場合、返されるパス名の最後に
" (deleted)"
という文字列が付加されることがある。
