.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2002, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 31 Jan 2002, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"	Added description of mmap2
.\" Modified, 2004-11-25, mtk -- removed stray #endif in prototype
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2002-07-18, Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 2003-09-06, Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-01-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-09-07, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v2.64
.\"
.TH MMAP2 2 2008-04-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
mmap2 \- ファイルやデバイスをメモリにマップする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
.BI "void *mmap2(void *" addr ", size_t " length ", int " prot ,
.BI "            int " flags ", int " fd ", off_t " pgoffset );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR mmap2 ()
システムコールは
.BR mmap (2)
と全く同じように動作する。
ただし最後の引き数には、ファイルのオフセットを
.RB ( mmap (2)
が行っている、バイト単位ではなく)
4096 バイトを単位として指定する。
これにより、32 ビットの
.I off_t
を使うアプリケーションで (2^44 バイトまでの)
大きなファイルをマップできるようになる。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、
.BR mmap2 ()
はマップされた領域へのポインタを返す。
エラーの場合は \-1 が返されて、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
ユーザ空間からデータを取得するときに問題があった。
.TP
.B EINVAL
(ページサイズが 4096 バイトでないプラットフォームにおいて)
.I offset * 4096
がシステムのページサイズの倍数ではない。
.PP
.BR mmap2 ()
は
.BR mmap (2)
と同じエラーを返すことができる。
.SH バージョン
.BR mmap2 ()
は、Linux 2.3.31 以降で使用可能である。
.SH 準拠
このシステムコールは Linux 独自である。
.SH 注意
現在では、glibc の
.BR mmap ()
のラッパー関数は、
.BR mmap (2)
システムコールではなく、このシステムコール
.RB ( mmap2 (2))
を起動する。

ia64 では、
.I offset
の単位は、実際にはシステムのページサイズであり、
4096 バイトではない。
.\" ia64 can have page sizes ranging from 4kB to 64kB.
.\" On cris, it looks like the unit might also be the page size,
.\" which is 8192 bytes. -- mtk, June 2007
.SH 関連項目
.BR getpagesize (2),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR mremap (2),
.BR msync (2),
.BR shm_open (3)
