.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 19:45:43 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated and revised Fri Oct 24 23:34:51 JST 2003
.\"         by Suzuki Takashi.
.\" Updated 2007-01-01 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD: in-core                メモリ上の
.\"
.TH MSYNC 2 2008-04-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
msync \- ファイルをマップしたメモリと同期させる
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
.BI "int msync(void *" addr ", size_t " length ", int " flags );
.SH 説明
.BR msync ()
は
.BR mmap (2)
を使ってメモリにマップされたファイルの、
メモリ上のコピーになされた変更をディスクに反映させる。
この関数を使用しないと、
.BR munmap (2)
が呼び出されるまで変更が書き戻される保証はない。
より正確には、ファイルのうち
.I addr
から始まり長さ
.I length
のメモリ領域に対応する部分が更新される。

.I flags
引数にはビット
.BR MS_ASYNC ,
.BR MS_SYNC ,
.B MS_INVALIDATE
を設定することができるが、
.B MS_ASYNC
と
.B MS_SYNC
を同時に指定することはできない。
.B MS_ASYNC
は更新を予定に組み込むことを表し、呼び出しは直ちに返る。
.B MS_SYNC
は更新を要求し、更新が完了するまで待つ。
.B MS_INVALIDATE
は(たった今書き込んだ新しい値でマッピングを更新することができるように)
同じファイルに対する他のマッピングを無効にすることを要求する。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、 0 が返る。エラーの場合、 \-1 が返り、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBUSY
I flags
に
.B MS_INVALIDATE
が指定されたが、指定されたアドレス範囲にロックが存在する。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I addr
が PAGESIZE の倍数でない。または、
.I flags
に
.BR MS_ASYNC 、 MS_INVALIDATE 、 MS_SYNC
以外のビットが設定された。
または、
.I flags
に
.B MS_SYNC
と
.B MS_ASYNC
の両方が設定された。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
指定されたメモリ (またはその一部) がマップされていない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.

この関数は Linux 1.3.21 で導入されたが、
.B ENOMEM
ではなく
.B EFAULT
が使われていた。
これは Linux 2.4.19 で POSIX における値
.B ENOMEM
に変更された。
.SH 可用性
.BR msync ()
が使用可能な POSIX システムでは
.B _POSIX_MAPPED_FILES
と
.B _POSIX_SYNCHRONIZED_IO
の両方が \fI<unistd.h>\fP で 0 より大きい値に定義される。
.RB ( sysconf (3)
を参照すること。 )
.\" POSIX.1-2001: これらの値は -1 または 0 または 200112L と定義される。
.\" -1 は使用不可能、 0 は sysconf() に問い合わせる
.\" glibc では 1 と定義している。
.SH 関連項目
.BR mmap (2)
.br
B.O. Gallmeister, POSIX.4, O'Reilly, pp. 128-129 and 389-391.
