.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Joseph Samuel Myers.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jun 25 23:32:20 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	descriptor		ディスクリプタ
.\"WORD:	offset			オフセット
.\"WORD:	seek			シーク
.\"
.TH PREAD 2 2010-09-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
pread, pwrite \- 指定したオフセットでファイルディスクリプタを読み書きする
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "ssize_t pread(int " fd ", void *" buf ", size_t " count \
", off_t " offset );
.sp
.BI "ssize_t pwrite(int " fd ", const void *" buf ", size_t " count \
", off_t " offset );
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.PD 0
.ad l
.sp
.BR pread (),
.BR pwrite ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.br
|| /* glibc 2.12 以降: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.RE
.ad
.PD
.SH 説明
.BR pread ()
は、ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
の (ファイルの先頭からの) オフセット
.I offset
から最大
.I count
バイトをバッファ
.I buf
へ読み込む。ファイル・オフセットは変化しない。
.PP
.BR pwrite ()
は、バッファ
.I buf
から最大
.I count
バイトをファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
のオフセット
.I offset
に書き込む。ファイル・オフセットは変化しない。
.PP
.I fd
で参照されるファイルはシーク (seek) 可能でなければならない。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、読み書きを行ったバイト数が返される (ゼロは、
.BR pwrite ()
の場合には何も書かれなかったことを意味し、
.BR pread ()
の場合にはファイル
の末尾に達したことを意味する)。
エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
がそのエラーを示すように設定される。
.SH エラー
.BR pread ()
では、
.BR read (2)
および
.BR lseek (2)
で規定された全てのエラーが発生する可能性があり、
.I error
にはエラーを示す値が設定される。
.BR pwrite ()
では、
.BR write (2)
および
.BR lseek (2)
で規定された全てのエラーが発生する可能性があり、
.I error
にはエラーを示す値が設定される。
.SH バージョン
システムコール
.BR pread ()
と
.BR pwrite ()
は Linux にバージョン 2.1.60 で追加された。
i386 のシステムコールのエントリは 2.1.69 で追加された。
(システムコールを持たない古いカーネルでの
.BR lseek (2)
を使ったエミュレーションを含めると)
C ライブラリにおけるサポートは glibc 2.1 で追加された。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 関連項目
.BR lseek (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR write (2)
