.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" FIXME There is much that is missing and/or out of date in this page.
.\" (There is a quotactl.2 page in the quotactl package that seems to
.\" have more info than this page.)
.\" As things stand the page more or less documents Linux 2.2 reality:
.\"
.\" Linux 2.2 has:
.\"
.\"	Q_GETQUOTA
.\"	Q_GETSTATS
.\"	Q_QUOTAOFF
.\"	Q_QUOTAON
.\"	Q_RSQUASH (not currently documented)
.\"	Q_SETQLIM
.\"	Q_SETQUOTA
.\"	Q_SETUSE
.\"	Q_SYNC
.\"
.\" Linux 2.4 has:
.\"
.\"	Q_COMP_QUOTAOFF
.\"	Q_COMP_QUOTAON
.\"	Q_COMP_SYNC
.\"	Q_GETFMT
.\"	Q_GETINFO
.\"	Q_GETQUOTA
.\"	Q_QUOTAOFF
.\"	Q_QUOTAON
.\"	Q_SETINFO
.\"	Q_SETQUOTA
.\"	Q_SYNC
.\"	Q_V1_GETQUOTA Q_V1_GETSTATS Q_V1_RSQUASH Q_V1_SETQLIM
.\"	Q_V1_SETQUOTA Q_V1_SETUSE
.\"	Q_V2_GETINFO Q_V2_GETQUOTA Q_V2_SETFLAGS Q_V2_SETGRACE
.\"	Q_V2_SETINFO Q_V2_SETQUOTA Q_V2_SETUSE
.\"	Q_XGETQSTAT Q_XGETQUOTA Q_XQUOTAOFF Q_XQUOTAON Q_XQUOTARM
.\"	Q_XSETQLIM
.\"
.\" Linux 2.6.16 has:
.\"
.\"	Q_GETFMT
.\"	Q_GETINFO
.\"	Q_GETQUOTA
.\"	Q_QUOTAOFF
.\"	Q_QUOTAON
.\"	Q_SETINFO
.\"	Q_SETQUOTA
.\"	Q_SYNC
.\"	Q_XGETQSTAT
.\"	Q_XGETQUOTA
.\"	Q_XQUOTAOFF
.\"	Q_XQUOTAON
.\"	Q_XQUOTARM
.\"	Q_XQUOTASYNC
.\"	Q_XSETQLIM
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Dec 21 21:58:06 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@jb3.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Modified Wed Dec 24 22:17:00 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb 24 02:50:48 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH QUOTACTL 2 2007-06-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
quotactl \- ディスク quota を操作する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/quota.h>
.sp
.BI "int quotactl(int " cmd ", const char *" special ", int " id \
", caddr_t " addr );
.fi
.SH 説明
quota システムは、各々のユーザ及び/またはグループに対して、
ソフト・リミット及びハード・リミットを定める。これはあるファイル・システムで
使用する事が出来るディスク容量を制限する。
ハード・リミットは超過することは出来ない。
ソフト・リミットは超過する事が出来るが、警告が発せられる。
更に、(デフォルトでは) 一週間以上ソフト・リミットを超過したままに
しておく事はできない: 一週間経過した後はハード・リミットを超過したと
みなされる。

.BR quotactl ()
システムコールはこれらの quota に対する操作を行なう。
最初の引き数は
.BI QCMD( subcmd , type )
という形式である。
.I type
には、ユーザー quota については
.B USRQUOTA
を、グループ quota については
.B GRPQUOTA
を指定する。
.I subcmd
は以下で説明する。

二番目の引き数
.I special
は quota を適用するデバイスのブロック・スペシャル・ファイルである。
そのデバイスはマウントされていなくてはならない。

三番目の引き数
.I id
には、(必要な場合に) quota を適用するユーザーもしくはグループの ID を指定する。

四番目の引き数
.I addr
には、コマンドごとに異ったデータ構造体のアドレスを指定する。

.I subcmd
は以下のいずれかである
.TP 1.1i
.B Q_QUOTAON
quota を有効にする。
.I addr
引き数には、そのファイル・システムの quota が記録されているファイルの
パス名を指定する。
.TP
.B Q_QUOTAOFF
quota を無効にする。
.TP
.B Q_GETQUOTA
ディスク使用量の制限値と現在の使用量を得る。
.I addr
引き数は
.RI ( <sys/quota.h>
で定義された) dqblk 構造体を指すポインタである。
.TP
.B Q_SETQUOTA
制限値と現在の使用量を設定する:
.I addr
は同上。
.TP
.B Q_SETQLIM
制限値を設定する;
.I addr
は同上。
.TP
.B Q_SETUSE
使用量を設定する。
.TP
.B Q_SYNC
ファイル・システムの quota ファイルをディスクと同期させる。
.TP
.B Q_GETSTATS
収集された統計を取得する。
.SH 返り値
.BR quotactl ()
は、成功時には 0 を返す。エラー時は、\-1 を返すとともに、
.I errno
が適切な値に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 0.9i
.B EACCES
quota ファイルが普通のファイルではない。
.TP
.B EBUSY
.B Q_QUOTAON
の要求がなされたが、quota(s) は既に有効になっている。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I addr
の値に誤りがある。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I type
が既知の quota の形式ではない。もしくは、
.I special
デバイスが見付からなかった。
.TP
.B EIO
quota ファイルへの読み書きが出来ない。
.TP
.B EMFILE
ファイルをオープンしすぎている: quota ファイルをオープン出来ない。
.TP
.B ENODEV
.I special
がマウント・テーブル内に見当たらない。
.TP
.B ENOPKG
quota を使用可にしてカーネルをコンパイルしていない。
.TP
.B ENOTBLK
.I special
がブロック・スペシャル・デバイスではない。
.TP
.B EPERM
プロセスが (そのファイル・システムの) root のものではなく、
かつプロセス自身のものとは異なる
.I id
に対して
.B Q_GETQUOTA
要求を行なった。
もしくは、
.BR Q_GETSTATS ,
.B Q_SYNC
以外の要求がなされた。
.TP
.B ESRCH
quota が有効になっていないファイル・システムに対して
.BR Q_GETQUOTA ,
.BR Q_SETQUOTA ,
.BR Q_SETUSE ,
.B Q_SETQLIM
のいずれかの要求がなされた。
.SH 準拠
BSD.
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR ulimit (3),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8)
