.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Written 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@duracef.shout.net>:
.\"   In 1.3.X, returns only one entry each time; return value is different.
.\" Modified 2004-12-01, mtk, fixed headers listed in SYNOPSIS
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 21:06:24 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	directory		ディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	entry			エントリ
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	system call		システム・コール
.\"WORD:	memory			メモリ
.\"WORD:	inode number		inode 番号
.\"WORD:	null			ヌル文字
.\"
.TH READDIR 2  2008-10-02 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
readdir \- ディレクトリ・エントリを読み込む
.SH 書式
.nf
.sp
.BI "int readdir(unsigned int " fd ", struct old_linux_dirent *" dirp ","
.BI "            unsigned int " count );
.fi
.SH 説明
これはあなたの興味をもっている関数ではない。
POSIX 準拠の C ライブラリ・インターフェースについては
.BR readdir (3)
を見ること。
このページは裸のカーネルのシステムコール・インターフェースについて
記述しているが、このインターフェースは
.BR getdents (2)
によって取って代わられた。
.PP
.BR readdir ()
は、ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
が参照しているディレクトリから
.I old_linux_dirent
構造体を読み込み、
.I dirp
で指されたバッファに格納する。
.I count
引き数は(ほとんどの
.I old_linux_dirent
構造体の読み込みにおいて)無視される
.PP
.I old_linux_dirent
構造体は以下のように宣言される:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct old_linux_dirent {
    long  d_ino;              /* inode number */
    off_t d_off;              /* offset to this \fIold_linux_dirent\fP */
    unsigned short d_reclen;  /* length of this \fId_name\fP */
    char  d_name[NAME_MAX+1]; /* filename (null-terminated) */
}
.fi
.in
.PP
.I d_ino
は inode 番号である。
.I d_off
はディレクトリの最初からこの
.I old_linux_dirent
まで距離である。
.I d_reclen
は
.I d_name
の大きさで、終端のヌルバイト (null byte) を含まない。
.I d_name
はヌルバイトで終わるファイル名である。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は、1 が返される。
ディレクトリの最後では 0 が返される。
エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
ファイル・ディスクリプター
.I fd
が不正である。
.TP
.B EFAULT
引き数のポインターが呼び出したプロセスがアクセス可能な空間の
外部を指している。
.TP
.B EINVAL
結果用のバッファーが小さ過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
そのようなディレクトリは存在しない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
ファイル・ディスクリプターがディレクトリを参照していない。
.SH 準拠
このシステム・コールは Linux 特有である。
.SH 注意
glibc はこのシステムコールに対するラッパー関数を提供していない。
.BR syscall (2)
を使って呼び出すこと。
.I old_linux_dirent
構造体を自分自身で定義する必要がある。
.SH 関連項目
.BR getdents (2),
.BR readdir (3)
