.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1997-01-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-12-12, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-10-11, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2005-02-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-07-23, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v2.36
.\" Updated 2008-08-06, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.05
.\"
.\"WORD:	directory		ディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	file system		ファイル・システム
.\"WORD:	sticky bit		スティッキー・ビット
.\"WORD:	dangling symbolic link	壊れたシンボリック・リンク
.\"WORD:	working directory	ワーキング・ディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	root directory		ルート・ディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	effective uid		実効ユーザーID
.\"WORD:	sticky bit		スティッキー・ビット
.\"WORD:	read-only		読み込み専用
.\"WORD:	uid			ユーザーID
.\"WORD:	entry			エントリ
.\"WORD:	memory			メモリ
.\"
.TH RMDIR 2 2008-05-08 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
rmdir \- ディレクトリを削除する
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int rmdir(const char *" pathname );
.SH 説明
.BR rmdir ()
はディレクトリを削除する。削除するディレクトリは空でなければならない。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合はゼロが返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.I pathname
を含んでいるディレクトリへの書き込みアクセスが
プロセスの実効 (effective) UID に対して許可されていないか、
.I pathname
に含まれているディレクトリのどれかに検索 (実行) 許可がないか、
.I pathname
に至るまでのディレクトリのいずれかに対する検索許可がなかった。
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照のこと)
.TP
.B EBUSY
.I pathname
がシステムや別のプロセスにより使用中で削除することができない。
Linux では、
.I pathname
がマウントポイントとして使用されているか、
呼び出したプロセスのルートディレクトリであることを意味する。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I pathname
がアクセス可能なアドレス空間の外を指している。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I pathname
の最後のディレクトリ部分が
.I .
である。
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I pathname
を解決する際に遭遇したシンボリック・リンクが多過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I pathname
が長過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.I pathname
の中のディレクトリ部分が存在しないか、壊れた (dangling)
シンボリック・リンク (symbolic link) である。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
十分なカーネルのメモリがない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.I pathname
か
.I pathname
に含まれているディレクトリ部分が、実際には、ディレクトリでない。
.TP
.B ENOTEMPTY
ディレクトリ
.I pathname
に
.IR . " と " ..
以外のエントリがある。または、
.I pathname
を構成する最後の要素が
.I ..
である。
POSIX.1-2001 は、この状況で
.B EEXIST
を返すことを認めている。
.TP
.B EPERM
.I pathname
を含んでいるディレクトリにスティッキー・ビット(sticky-bit)
.RB ( S_ISVTX )
が設定されていて、プロセスの実効ユーザーID が削除しようとするファイルの
ユーザID とそのファイルを含むディレクトリのユーザーID のどちらとも異なり、
プロセスも権限 (Linux では
.B CAP_FOWNER
ケーパビリティ) がない。
.TP
.B EPERM
.I pathname
を含んでいるファイル・システムがディレクトリの
削除をサポートしていない。
.TP
.B EROFS
.I pathname
が読み込み専用のファイル・システム上のディレクトリを参照している。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH バグ
NFS プロトコルに潜在している欠陥によって、まだ使用中のディレクトリが
突然消滅する現象が引き起こされることがある。
.SH 関連項目
.BR rm (1),
.BR rmdir (1),
.BR chdir (2),
.BR chmod (2),
.BR mkdir (2),
.BR rename (2),
.BR unlink (2),
.BR unlinkat (2)
