.\" Copyright Michael Haardt (michael@cantor.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\"     Sat Aug 27 20:43:50 MET DST 1994
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Sep 11 19:19:05 1994 <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Mar 25 10:19:00 1996 <aeb@cwi.nl> (merged a few
.\"    tiny changes from a man page by Charles Livingston).
.\" Modified Sun Jul 21 14:45:46 1996 <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar  1 16:46:43 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Modified Mon May  5 19:43:49 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb 10 22:45:24 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	session			セッション
.\"WORD:	process group ID	プロセス・グループID
.\"WORD:	process group leader	プロセス・グループ・リーダー
.\"
.TH SETSID 2 2008-12-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
setsid \- セッション (session) を作成し、プロセス・グループ ID を設定する
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B pid_t setsid(void);
.br
.ad b
.SH 説明
.BR setsid ()
は呼び出したプロセスがプロセス・グループ・リーダー
(process group leader) でなければ、新しいセッションを作成する。
呼び出したプロセスは新しいセッションのリーダー、新しいプロセス・グループの
プロセス・グループ・リーダーとなり、tty の制御を持たない。
呼び出したプロセスのプロセス・グループ ID とセッション ID には、
呼び出したプロセスの PID が設定される。呼び出したプロセスはこの
新しいプロセス・グループ、この新しいセッションの唯一のプロセスとなる。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、呼び出したプロセスの (新しい) セッション ID が返される。
エラーの場合は、
.I "(pid_t)\ \-1"
が返され、
.I error
にエラーを示す値が設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
いずれかのプロセスのプロセス・グループ ID が、
呼び出したプロセスの PID と等しい。
これは、呼び出したプロセスが既にプロセス・リーダーの場合には
.BR setsid ()
は失敗することを意味する。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
.BR fork (2)
で作成された子プロセスは、親プロセスのセッション ID を継承する。
.BR execve (2)
の前後でセッション ID は保存される。

プロセス・グループ・リーダーとは、そのプロセスのプロセス・グループ ID が
その PID に等しいプロセスである。
.BR setsid ()
を確実に成功させるためには、
.BR fork (2)
して
.BR exit (2)
し、子プロセスで
.BR setsid ()
を行なえば良い。
.SH 関連項目
.BR getsid (2),
.BR setpgid (2),
.BR setpgrp (2),
.BR tcgetsid (3),
.BR credentials (7)
