.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:14:13 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>
.\"   Update calling parameters to Linux 1.2.4 values.
.\" Modified 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 3 May 1996 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\" Modified Wed Nov  6 04:05:28 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Sat Jan 29 01:08:23 2000 by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Daisuke Sato
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Apr 19 15:22:53 JST 1997
.\"         by Daisuke Sato
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Mar 1 1999
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Mar 16 09:32:28 2000
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	file systems		ファイルシステム
.\"WORD:	root file system	ルートファイルシステム
.\"WORD:	superuser		スーパーユーザー
.\"WORD:	user process		ユーザープロセス
.\"
.TH SETUP 2 2008-12-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
setup \- デバイスとファイルシステムの初期化を行い、
ルートファイルシステムのマウントを行う
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B int setup(void);
.SH 説明
.BR setup ()
は
.I linux/init/main.c
の中で一度だけ呼ばれる。
カーネル内部のデバイスとファイルシステムの初期化関数を呼び、
ルートファイルシステムのマウントを行う。
.PP
ユーザープロセスからは
.BR setup ()
を呼びだすことはできない。
ユーザープロセスからのアクセスは、たとえそのプロセスが
スーパーユーザー権限を持っていても
.B EPERM
を受け取ることになる。
.SH 返り値
.BR setup ()
はユーザープロセスに対して常に \-1 を返す。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
ユーザプロセスに対しては、常にこのエラーとなる。
.SH バージョン
Linux 2.1.121 以降では、もはやこの関数は存在しない。
.SH 準拠
この関数は Linux に特有のものであり、移植を考慮したプログラムでは
用いるべきではない。それどころか、あらゆるプログラムで用いるべきではない。
.SH 注意
呼び出し手続きは変化してきた。
ある時は
.I setup ()
は一つの引数
.I "void *BIOS"
を取っており、またある時には
.IR "int magic"
を一つの引数として取っていた。
