'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-10-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.66
.\" 
.TH SGETMASK 2  2007-07-05 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sgetmask, ssetmask \- シグナルマスクの操作 (廃止予定)
.SH 書式
.B "long sgetmask(void);"
.sp
.BI "long ssetmask(long " newmask );
.SH 説明
これらのシステムコールは廃止予定であり、
「使用しないこと」。
代わりに
.BR sigprocmask (2)
を使用すること。

.BR sgetmask ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスのシグナルマスクを返す。

.BR ssetmask ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスのシグナルマスクを
.I newmask
で指定された値に設定し、変更前のシグナルマスクを返す。

これら二つのシステムコールが扱うシグナルマスクは、
単純なビットマスクである (この点が
.BR sigprocmask (2)
で使用される
.I sigset_t
と異なる)。
これらのマスクを作成したり検査するには
.BR sigmask (3)
を使用すること。
.SH 返り値
.BR sgetmask ()
は常に成功し、シグナルマスクを返す。
.BR ssetmask ()
は常に成功し、直前のシグナルマスクを返す。
.SH エラー
これらのシステムコールは常に成功する。
.SH 準拠
これらのシステムコールは Linux 固有である。
.SH 注意
glibc はこれらのシステムコールに対するラッパー関数を提供していない。
.BR syscall (2)
を使用すること。

これらのシステムコールは、
31 より大きいシグナル番号 (つまり、リアルタイムシグナル) を扱えない。

.B SIGSTOP
や
.B SIGKILL
をブロックすることはできない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
