.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Created   Sat Aug 21 1995     Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:09:03 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-03-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-09-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-08-07, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.05
.\"
.\"WORD:	signal			シグナル
.\"WORD:	signal handler		シグナル・ハンドラ
.\"WORD:	stack frame		スタック・フレーム
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	interrupt		割り込み
.\"WORD:	architecture		アーキテクチャ
.\"
.TH SIGRETURN 2 2008-06-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sigreturn \- シグナル・ハンドラから返り、スタックを掃除する
.SH 書式
.BI "int sigreturn(unsigned long " __unused );
.SH 説明
Linux カーネルは、
シグナル・ハンドラ用にスタック・フレームを作成する際、
.BR sigreturn ()
をスタック・フレームに挿入し、シグナル・ハンドラが返るときに
.BR sigreturn ()
が呼ばれるようにする。

.BR sigreturn ()
は、シグナル・ハンドラを起動するために行ったことの全て \(em
プロセスのシグナルマスクの変更、スタックの切り替え
.RB ( sigaltstack (2)
参照) \(em の取り消しを行う。
プロセスのシグナルマスクの復元、スタックの切り替え、
プロセスのコンテキスト (レジスタ、プロセッサ・フラグ) の復元を行い、
プロセスがシグナルにより割り込まれた場所からそのまま実行を
再開できるようにする。
.SH 返り値
.BR sigreturn ()
が返ることはない。
.SH ファイル
/usr/src/linux/arch/i386/kernel/signal.c
.br
/usr/src/linux/arch/alpha/kernel/entry.S
.SH 準拠
.BR sigreturn ()
は Linux 特有であり、移植を意図したプログラムでは使用してはいけない。
.SH 注意
.BR sigreturn ()
コールは、シグナル・ハンドラを実装するためにカーネルにより使用される。
これを直接呼び出しては
.B 決して
いけない。さらに
.I __unused
引き数がどのように使われるかはそのアーキテクチャに依存して変化する。
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaltstack (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR signal (7)
