.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:02:47 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 15 Apr 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added reference to `bdflush(2)'.
.\" Modified 960414 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>:
.\"   Added the fact that since 1.3.20 sync actually waits.
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:27:07 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2001-10-10 by aeb, following Michael Kerrisk.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Daisuke Sato
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Apr 19 15:22:53 JST 1997
.\"         by Daisuke Sato
.\" Modified Sun Mar 21 17:23:38 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Oct 16 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Mon Sep  8 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	buffer cache		バッファ・キャッシュ
.\"WORD:	buffers			バッファ
.\"WORD:	data integrity		データの完全性
.\"
.TH SYNC 2 2010-09-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sync \- バッファキャッシュをディスクに書き込む
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B void sync(void);
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR sync ():
.ad l
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
.BR sync ()
はまず inode をバッファへ書き込み、
それからバッファ(buffer)をディスクへ書き込む。
.SH エラー
この関数は常に成功する。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH 注意
さまざまな標準規格での規定にしたがって、
glibc 2.2.2 から Linux でのプロトタイプは上述のようになった。
libc4, libc5 と、2.2.1 までの glibc では "int sync(void)" で、
.BR sync ()
は常に 0 を返していた。
.SH バグ
標準規格 (例えば POSIX.1-2001) によると、
.BR sync ()
は書き込むことを予定に
組み込むのみで実際に書き込みが終了する前に戻ってもよいことになっている。
一方で Linux はバージョン 1.3.20 からは書き込みが終了するまで待つ。
(最近のディスクは大きなキャッシュを持っているため、
 これはデータの完全性 (data integrity) までは保証していない。)
.SH 関連項目
.BR bdflush (2),
.BR fdatasync (2),
.BR fsync (2),
.BR sync (8),
.BR update (8)
