.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Created   Wed Aug  9 1995     Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar  4 00:03:08 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jun  2 20:46:34 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	file system		ファイル・システム
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	identifier string	識別文字列
.\"WORD:	type index		型インデックス
.\"
.TH SYSFS 2 2010-06-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sysfs \- ファイル・システム (file system) の情報を取得する
.SH 書式
.BI "int sysfs(int " option ", const char *" fsname );

.BI "int sysfs(int " option ", unsigned int " fs_index ", char *" buf );

.BI "int sysfs(int " option );
.SH 説明
.BR sysfs ()
は現在カーネル (kernel) に存在しているファイル・システムの型 (type) 情報を返す。
それぞれの
.BR sysfs ()
コールの形式と返される情報は
.I option
に依存しており、それは:
.TP 3
.B 1
ファイル・システム識別文字列 (identifier string)
.I fsname
をファイル・システムの型インデックス (type index) に翻訳する。
.TP
.B 2
ファイル・システムの型インデックス
.I fs_index
を NULL 終端されたファイル・システム識別文字列に翻訳する。
この文字列は
.I buf
で指定されたバッファーへ書き込まれる。
.I buf
に文字列を入れるだけの十分な容量があることを確かめること。
.TP
.B 3
現在カーネルに存在するファイル・システム型の数の合計を返す。
.PP
ファイル・システムの型インデックスの数はゼロから始まる。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合
.BR sysfs ()
は、
オプション
.B 1
では
ファイル・システムのインデックスを返す。
オプション
.B 2
ではゼロを返す。
オプション
.B 3
は現在設定されているファイル・システムの数を返す。
エラーの場合は、\-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.RI  fsname " と " buf
のどちらかがアクセス可能なアドレス空間の外にある。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I fsname
が正しいファイル・システムの型識別子ではない;
.I fs_index
が範囲の外にある;
.I option
が正しくない。
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.SH 注意
この System-V 由来のシステムコールは廃止予定 (obsolete) であり、
使用しないこと。
.I /proc
が利用できるシステムでは、同じ情報が
.I /proc/filesystems
経由で取得でき、このインタフェースを使用すること。
.SH バグ
libc または glibc のサポートは存在しない。
\fIbuf\fP の大きさがどれだけ必要かを推測する方法がない。
