.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1993 by Dan Miner (dminer@nyx.cs.du.edu)
.\"
.\"  Permission is granted to freely distribute or modify this file
.\"  for the purpose of improving Linux or its documentation efforts.
.\"  If you modify this file, please put a date stamp and HOW you
.\"  changed this file.  Thanks.   -DM
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:35:12 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:29:51 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Mon Aug 25 16:06:11 1997 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar  4 00:04:15 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Modified Mon Sep 23 21:56:40 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	library			ライブラリ
.\"WORD:	statistic		統計
.\"WORD:	pointer			ポインター
.\"WORD:	prototype		型宣言
.\"
.TH SYSINFO 2 2007-11-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sysinfo \- システム全体の統計情報を返す。
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/sysinfo.h>
.sp
.BI "int sysinfo(struct sysinfo *" info );
.SH 説明
Linux 2.3.16 までは
.BR sysinfo ()
は以下の構造体に情報を入れて返す。

.nf
.in +4n
struct sysinfo {
    long uptime;             /* Seconds since boot */
    unsigned long loads[3];  /* 1, 5, and 15 minute load averages */
    unsigned long totalram;  /* Total usable main memory size */
    unsigned long freeram;   /* Available memory size */
    unsigned long sharedram; /* Amount of shared memory */
    unsigned long bufferram; /* Memory used by buffers */
    unsigned long totalswap; /* Total swap space size */
    unsigned long freeswap;  /* swap space still available */
    unsigned short procs;    /* Number of current processes */
    char _f[22];             /* Pads structure to 64 bytes */
};
.in
.fi
.PP
ここでバイト単位で与えられる。

Linux 2.3.23 (i386)、2.3.48 (全てのアーキテクチャ) からは構造体は

.nf
.in +4n
struct sysinfo {
    long uptime;             /* Seconds since boot */
    unsigned long loads[3];  /* 1, 5, and 15 minute load averages */
    unsigned long totalram;  /* Total usable main memory size */
    unsigned long freeram;   /* Available memory size */
    unsigned long sharedram; /* Amount of shared memory */
    unsigned long bufferram; /* Memory used by buffers */
    unsigned long totalswap; /* Total swap space size */
    unsigned long freeswap;  /* swap space still available */
    unsigned short procs;    /* Number of current processes */
    unsigned long totalhigh; /* Total high memory size */
    unsigned long freehigh;  /* Available high memory size */
    unsigned int mem_unit;   /* Memory unit size in bytes */
    char _f[20\-2*sizeof(long)\-sizeof(int)]; /* Padding for libc5 */
};
.in
.fi
.PP
となり、大きさは \fImem_unit\fP バイトの倍数で与えられる。

.BR sysinfo ()
はシステム全体の統計を取得する簡単な方法を提供する。
これは \fI/dev/kmem\fP を読むよりも移植性の高い方法である。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合はゼロが返される。エラーならば \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I sysinfo 構造体
へのポインターが不正である。
.SH 準拠
この関数は Linux 特有であり、移植を意図したプログラムでは
使用してはいけない。
.sp
Linux カーネルは 0.98.pl6 から
.BR sysinfo ()
システムコールを持っている。
Linux の libc は 5.3.5 より、glibc では 1.90 より
.BR sysinfo ()
ルーチンを含んでいる。
.SH 関連項目
.BR proc (5)
