.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006 Jens Axboe
.\" and Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-02-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" 
.TH TEE 2 2009-09-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
tee \- パイプの中身を複製する
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.B #include <fcntl.h>

.BI "ssize_t tee(int " fd_in ", int " fd_out ", size_t " len \
", unsigned int " flags );
.fi
.\" Return type was long before glibc 2.7
.SH 説明
.\" Example programs http://brick.kernel.dk/snaps
.\"
.\"
.\" add a "tee(in, out1, out2)" system call that duplicates the pages
.\" (again, incrementing their reference count, not copying the data) from
.\" one pipe to two other pipes.
.BR tee ()
は、ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd_in
が参照するパイプからファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd_out
が参照するパイプへ最大
.I len
バイトのデータを複製する。
この操作では、複製されるデータは
.I fd_in
からは消費されない。したがって、これらのデータをこの後の
.BR splice (2)
でコピーすることができる。

.I flags
は一連の修飾フラグであり、
.BR splice (2)
や
.BR vmsplice (2)
と共通の名前である。
.TP 1.9i
.B SPLICE_F_MOVE
現在のところ
.BR tee ()
では何の効果もない。
.BR splice (2)
参照。
.TP
.B SPLICE_F_NONBLOCK
入出力時に停止 (block) しない。
詳細は
.BR splice (2)
参照。
.TP
.B SPLICE_F_MORE
現在のところ
.BR tee ()
では何の効果もないが、将来的には実装される可能性がある。
.BR splice (2)
参照。
.TP
.B SPLICE_F_GIFT
.BR tee ()
では未使用。
.BR vmsplice (2)
参照。
.SH 返り値
成功して完了すると、
.BR tee ()
は入出力間で複製されたバイト数を返す。
返り値 0 はデータの転送が行われなかったことを示す。
この場合、処理を停止 (block) しても無意味である。
なぜなら、
.I fd_in
が参照するパイプの書き込み側に接続されている者がいないからである。

エラーの場合、
.BR tee ()
は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値を設定する。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I fd_in
と
.I fd_out
のどちらかがパイプを参照していない。もしくは
.I fd_in
と
.I fd_out
が同じパイプを参照している。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
メモリ不足。
.SH バージョン
.BR tee ()
システムコールは Linux 2.6.17 で初めて登場した。
.SH 準拠
このシステムコールは Linux 固有である。
.SH 注意
概念としては、
.BR tee ()
は二つのパイプ間でデータのコピーを行う。
しかし、実際には実データのコピーは行われない。
内部では、
.BR tee ()
は入力側に対する参照だけを作成することで出力側にデータを
追加する。
.SH 例
以下の例は、
.BR tee ()
システムコールを使って、
基本的な
.BR tee (1)
プログラムを実装したものである。
.nf

#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>
#include <limits.h>

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd;
    int len, slen;

    if (argc != 2) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s <file>\\n", argv[0]);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    fd = open(argv[1], O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, 0644);
    if (fd == \-1) {
        perror("open");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    do {
        /*
         * tee stdin to stdout.
         */
        len = tee(STDIN_FILENO, STDOUT_FILENO,
                  INT_MAX, SPLICE_F_NONBLOCK);

        if (len < 0) {
            if (errno == EAGAIN)
                continue;
            perror("tee");
            exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
        } else
            if (len == 0)
                break;

        /*
         * Consume stdin by splicing it to a file.
         */
        while (len > 0) {
            slen = splice(STDIN_FILENO, NULL, fd, NULL,
                          len, SPLICE_F_MOVE);
            if (slen < 0) {
                perror("splice");
                break;
            }
            len \-= slen;
        }
    } while (1);

    close(fd);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.fi
.SH 関連項目
.BR splice (2),
.BR vmsplice (2)
