.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Updated, aeb, 980612
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jun 26 21:24:15 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Modified Tue Jan 26 00:04:30 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH UNIMPLEMENTED 2 2007-07-05 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
afs_syscall, break, ftime, getpmsg, gtty, lock, madvise1, mpx, prof, profil,
putpmsg, security, stty, tuxcall, ulimit, vserver \- 実装されていないシステムコール
.SH 書式
実装されていないシステムコール
.SH 説明
これらのシステムコールは Linux 2.6.22 カーネルでは実装されていない。
.SH 返り値
これらのシステムコールは常に \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に
.BR ENOSYS 
を設定する。
.SH 注意
.BR ftime (3),
.BR profil (3),
.BR ulimit (3)
はライブラリ関数として実装されていることに注意すること。

.BR alloc_hugepages (2),
.BR free_hugepages (2),
.BR ioperm (2),
.BR iopl (2),
.BR vm86 (2)
のようなシステムコールは特定のアーキテクチャにのみ存在する。

.BR ipc (2),
.BR create_module (2),
.BR init_module (2),
.BR delete_module (2)
のようなシステムコールは Linux カーネルがそれらをサポートするよう
に構築されている場合にのみ存在する。
.SH 関連項目
.BR syscalls (2)
