.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Created  1995-08-09 Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\" Modified 1997-01-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2001-03-22 by aeb
.\" Modified 2003-08-04 by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec  4 23:12:06 JST 1996
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May 22 19:00:40 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	file system		ファイル・システム
.\"WORD:	mount			マウント
.\"WORD:	device			デバイス
.\"WORD:	member			メンバー
.\"WORD:	NUL character		ヌル文字
.\"WORD:	implement		実装
.\"WORD:	pointer			ポインター
.\"
.TH USTAT 2 2003-08-04 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ustat \- ファイル・システム (file system) の統計を得る
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.BR "#include <unistd.h>" "    /* libc[45] */"
.br
.BR "#include <ustat.h>" "     /* glibc2 */"
.sp
.BI "int ustat(dev_t " dev ", struct ustat *" ubuf );
.fi
.SH 説明
.BR ustat ()
はマウント (mount) されたファイル・システムの情報を返す。
.I dev
は調べるファイル・システムを含んでいるデバイス (device) の
デバイス番号。
.I ubuf
は以下のメンバーを含む ustat 構造体へのポインター:
.in +4n
.nf

daddr_t f_tfree;      /* Total free blocks */
ino_t   f_tinode;     /* Number of free inodes */
char    f_fname[6];   /* Filsys name */
char    f_fpack[6];   /* Filsys pack name */
.fi
.in
.PP
後の二つのフィールド
.I f_fname
と
.I f_fpack
は実装されておらず、常に NULL バイト (\(aq\\0\(aq) で埋められる。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合にはゼロが返され、
.I ubuf
が指す
.I ustat
構造体が埋められる。
エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I ubuf
がアクセス可能な空間の外側を指している。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I dev
がマウントされたファイル・システムを含むデバイスを参照していない。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.I dev
で参照されるマウントされたファイル・システムがこの操作 (operation) を
サポートしていないか、Linux のバージョンが 1.3.16 以前である。
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.\" SVr4 には他に ENOLINK, ECOMM, EINTR についての記述があるが、
.\" ENOSYS エラーについての記述はない。
.SH 注意
.BR ustat ()
は推奨されず、互換性のためだけに提供される。
新しいプログラムは全てこれの代りに
.BR statfs (2)
を使用するべきである。
.SS "HP-UX における注意"
HP-UX 版の構造体
.I ustat
には、その他にフィールド
.I f_blksize
が存在するが、他では見かけない。
HP-UX は次のように警告している:
ファイルシステムの中には、解放されている inode の数を変更しないものもある。
このようなファイルシステムは、フィールド
.I f_tinode
に \-1 を返す。
.\" ファイルシステムが NFS であるか否かをテストするために
.\" これを使用するソフトウェアもある。
ファイルシステムの中には、inode を動的に確保するものもある。
このようなファイルシステムは、現在解放されている inode の数を返す。
.SH 関連項目
.BR stat (2),
.BR statfs (2)
