.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" Modified, 27 May 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on capability requirements
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar  4 00:12:32 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 15 03:38:03 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	virtualy		仮想的に
.\"WORD:	hangup			ハングアップ
.\"WORD:	terminal		端末
.\"
.TH VHANGUP 2 2007-07-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
vhangup \- 現在の tty を仮想的に (virtualy) ハングアップ (hangup) させる
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B int vhangup(void);
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR vhangup ():
_BSD_SOURCE || (_XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE\ <\ 500)
.ad b
.SH 説明
.BR vhangup ()
は現在の端末 (terminal) でハングアップをシミュレートする。
このコールは他のユーザーがログインした時に綺麗 (clean) な tty を
得ることができるよう手配する。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
呼び出し元プロセスに
.BR vhangup ()
を呼び出すための十分な特権がない。
.B CAP_SYS_TTY_CONFIG
ケーパビリティ (capability) が必要である。
.SH 準拠
このコールは Linux 特有であり、移植を意図したプログラムで
使用してはいけない。
.SH 関連項目
.BR capabilities (7),
.BR init (8)
