.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Copyright 1997 Andries E. Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jun 26 21:32:38 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Modified Sun Mar 21 17:23:16 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May 22 19:50:44 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH VM86 2 2009-02-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
vm86old, vm86 \- 仮想 8086 モードへ移行する
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/vm86.h>
.sp
.BI "int vm86old(struct vm86_struct *" info );
.sp
.BI "int vm86(unsigned long " fn ", struct vm86plus_struct *" v86 );
.SH 説明
.BR vm86 ()
システムコールは Linux 0.97p2 で導入された。
これは Linux 2.1.15 と 2.0.28 で
.BR vm86old ()
に名前が変更され、
新しい
.BR vm86 ()
が導入された。
\fIstruct vm86_struct\fP の定義は 1.1.8 と 1.1.9 で変更された。
.LP
これらのコールによってプロセスは VM86 モード
(Intel の文書では仮想 8086 モード) へと移行する。
これらのコールは
.B dosemu
で使用される。
.PP
VM86 モードはプロテクトモードタスクにおける
リアルモードのエミュレーションである。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 を返す。失敗した場合は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
がエラーの内容に従って設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
この返り値は i386 固有のものであり、
ユーザー空間のデータを取得する際に問題があったことを示す。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
この返り値は、このコールが現在のアーキテクチャで実装されていないことを示す。
.TP
.B EPERM
保存されたカーネルスタックが既に存在している。(これはカーネルが通常の
状態であるかをチェックしている。保存されたスタックは vm86 モードで
しか存在しない。)
.SH 準拠
この関数は 32 ビット Intel プロセッサ上の Linux 特有の関数であり、
移植を意図したプログラムでは使用すべきでない。
