'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 lars brinkhoff <lars@nocrew.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified, Thu Jan 27 19:16:19 CET 2000, lars@nocrew.org
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 11 20:05:48 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	handshake	ハ潟激сゃ
.\"WORD:	device		デバゃ
.\"WORD:	processer	プ祉泣
.\"WORD:	transmit	送篆
.\"WORD:	recieve		受篆
.\"WORD:	quantity	単篏
.\"
.TH DSP56K 4 2000-03-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
dsp56k \- DSP56001 ゃ潟帥若с若鴻祉バゃ
.SH 後
.nf
#include <asm/dsp56k.h>
.sp
.BI "ssize_t read(int " fd ", void *" data ", size_t " length );
.BI "ssize_t write(int " fd ", void *" data ", size_t " length );

.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", DSP56K_UPLOAD, struct dsp56k_upload *" program );
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", DSP56K_SET_TX_WSIZE, int " wsize );
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", DSP56K_SET_RX_WSIZE, int " wsize );
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", DSP56K_HOST_FLAGS, struct dsp56k_host_flags *" flags );
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", DSP56K_HOST_CMD, int " cmd );
.fi
.SH 荐
dsp56k デバゃ鴻＜吾ｃ主 55、マゃ主 0 の
ｃ帥若祉バゃ鴻сる。
.SH 茯
Motorola DSP56001 Atari Falcon030 篋換潟潟ャ若帥т戎われる
フ違ブ 24 ビット吾帥激違祉泣若сる。
鴻激ｃ＜ゃ \fIdsp56k\fP DSP56001 九勝と
双劫ハ潟激сゃ鴻ポ若с若帥受篆＜め戎われる。
.PP
デ若帥鴻若を激違祉泣若篆＜るため
デバゃ鴻して
.BR write (2)
を篏帥こ
されたデ若帥受篆＜るため
.BR read (2)
を篏帥こ
ホ鴻眼сデ若帥 8, 16, 24, 32 ビット単篏ч受篆＜сるが、
DSP56001 内с24 ビット単篏ф宴れる。
.PP
罨＜
.BR ioctl (2)
潟若 \fIdsp56k\fP デバゃ鴻九勝するため戎われる。
.IP \fBDSP56K_UPLOAD\fP
DSP56001 を祉トし、プ違を≪プ若する。
.BR ioctl (2)
の 3 き違
罕造篏 \fIstruct dsp56k_binary\fP 吾ゃ潟帥сれ違。
罕造篏＜潟ー \fIbin\fP は DSP56001 バゃ違を指し、
罕造篏＜潟ー \fIlen\fP は 24 ビット若ф違た
プ違激┃絎されれ違。
.IP \fBDSP56K_SET_TX_WSIZE\fP
送篆＜若泣ゃ冴荐する。
荐сるゃ 1 〜 4 蚊сこゃ医だけ 1 綺 DSP56001 篆＜る。
こ若水篏DSP56001 ャ 24 ビットデ若水就綣わせるため、
若ゃуめられたり、切り荅違られたりする。
.IP \fBDSP56K_SET_RX_WSIZE\fP
受篆＜若泣ゃ冴荐する。
荐сるゃ 1 〜 4 蚊с
こゃ医だけ 1 綺 DSP56001 から受篆＜る。
こ若水篏DSP56001 ャ 24 ビットデ若水就綣わせるため、
切り荅違られたり、NULL バゃ (\(aq\\0\(aq) уめられたりする。
.IP \fBDSP56K_HOST_FLAGS\fP
ホ鴻フ違茯炊吾する。
ホ鴻フ違筝т戎うこсるビットс
ホ鴻潟潟ャ若帥 DSP56001 検鴻ら茯こсる。
ビット 0 と 1 ホ鴻ｃ吾莨若こс、
ビット 2 と 3 DSP56001 ｃ吾莨若こсる。

ホ鴻フ違≪祉鴻るため
.BR ioctl (2)
の 3 き違
罕造篏 \fIstruct dsp56k_host_flags\fP 吾ゃ潟帥сれ違。
こ造篏＜潟ー \fIdir\fP ット 0 障は 1 が荐される
＜潟ー \fIout\fP 綽するビットゃホ鴻フ違吾莨若障る。
す鴻鴻フ違倶罕造篏＜潟ー \fIstatus\fP の
筝から 4 ビットされる。
.IP \fBDSP56K_HOST_CMD\fP
ホ鴻潟潟を送篆＜る。
送篆＜сるゃ 0 〜 31 蚊сDSP56001 у篏しるプ違ｃ
される若吟弱臂潟潟сる。
.SH フ＜ゃ
/dev/dsp56k
.\" .SH 著者
.\" Fredrik Noring <noring@nocrew.org>, lars brinkhoff <lars@nocrew.org>,
.\" Tomas Berndtsson <tomas@nocrew.org>.
.SH ∫ｉ目
.IR linux/include/asm-m68k/dsp56k.h ,
.IR linux/drivers/char/dsp56k.c ,
.IR http://dsp56k.nocrew.org/ ,
DSP56000/DSP56001 Digital Signal Processor User's Manual
