.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:56:20 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 21:38:51 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" (and some more by aeb)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 11 03:35:23 JST 1998
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Thu Feb  5 17:36:37 JST 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	hard disk drive		ハ若デｃ鴻ゃ
.\" WORD:	block device		ブバゃ
.\" WORD:	primary			プゃリ
.\" WORD:	controller		潟潟若
.\" WORD:	master drive		マ鴻帥若ゃ
.\" WORD:	slave drive		鴻若ドゃ
.\" WORD:	pertition		パ若ｃ激с
.\" WORD:	logical partition	茫理パ若ｃ激с
.\" WORD:	pertitioning		パ若ｃ激с潟
.\" WORD:	BSD-disklabel		BSD デｃ鴻ル
.\"
.TH HD 4 1992-12-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
hd \- MFM/IDE ハ若デｃ鴻バゃ
.SH 茯
\fBhd*\fP デバゃ鴻 MFM/IDE ハ若デｃ鴻ゃ若≪若 (raw mode)
с≪祉鴻るためバゃ (block device) сる。プゃリ
(primary) IDE 潟潟若 (＜吾ｃ若潟ー 3) の マ鴻帥若ゃ
(mater drive) は \fBhda\fR、鴻若ドゃ (slave drive) は \fBhdb\fR
сる。障、祉潟潟潟若 (＜吾ｃ若潟ー 22) 鴻帥
ドゃは \fBhdc\fR 鴻若は \fBhdd\fR сる。
.LP
筝な IDE ブバゃ鴻前は
.BI hd X\c
障
.BI hd XP\c
う綵∽を。こ
.I X
的ゃを茵文絖с
.I P
的ゃ筝若ｃ激с (partition) を茵医で
ある。こ初就綣
.BI hd X,
ゃを腓冴戎われる。
パ若ｃ激с潟潟若肴されたパ若ｃ激с潟蚊篁けられる。
パ若ｃ激с潟潟若蚊篁けられる腥冴с (nonempty) かつ
≦宍パ若ｃ激с潟с (nonextended) パ若ｃ激с潟帥сる。
こ＜パ若ｃ激с潟潟ー 1 から 4 れが篏帥れ、
障≦宍パ若ｃ激с潟 MBR 菴違れる四ゃ若ｃ激с
(いわゆる、プリ'パ若ｃ激с) えられる。
緇ｃ最初理パ若ｃ激с (logical pertition) 
.BI hd X 5\c
だろう。
(IDE ハ若デｃ鴻с) DOS 帥ゃ若ｃ激с潟 (partitioning)
と BSD デｃ鴻ル (BSD-disklabel) るパ若ｃ激с潟違検鴻
泣若される。障、IDE デｃ鴻蕭 63 若ｃ激с潟
篏成する篋がсる。
.LP
箴え違
.I /dev/hda
激鴻ム初の IDE ドゃを参сる。そし
.I /dev/hdb3
祉潟ドゃゃの DOS `プゃリ'パ若ｃ激с潟参сる。
.LP
これらバゃ鴻＜ゃ (device file) 後的うられる。
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda b 3 0
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda1 b 3 1
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda2 b 3 2
.br
\&...
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda8 b 3 8
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb b 3 64
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb1 b 3 65
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb2 b 3 66
.br
\&...
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb8 b 3 72
.br
chown root:disk /dev/hd*
.RE
.SH フ＜ゃ
/dev/hd*
.SH ∫ｉ目
.BR chown (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR sd (4)
.BR mount (8),
