.\" sd.4
.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-02-06, ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-11-19, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	pointer		ポゃ潟
.\" WORD:	structure	罕造篏
.\" WORD:	geometry	吾＜リ
.\" WORD:	sector		祉
.\" WORD:	implement	絎茖
.\" WORD:	raw device	若バゃ
.\"
.TH SD 4 1992-12-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sd \- SCSI デｃ鴻ゃめゃ
.SH 後
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/hdreg.h>        " "/* for HDIO_GETGEO */"
.BR "#include <linux/fs.h>           " "/* for BLKGETSIZE and BLKRRPART */"
.fi
.SH 荐
こバゃ (block device) 前罨＜う就綣を:
.BI sd lp,
こ＜
.I l
ドゃを意潟る文絖сり、
.I p
ドゃ筝若ｃ激с (partition) を意潟る医сる。
パ若ｃ激с潟潟ー
.I p
が翫そバゃ鴻＜ゃゃをさす。

SCSI デｃ鴻＜吾ｃ若潟ー 8 を持＜罨＜う就綣ゃ若潟ー
を持ゃ(16 *
.IR drive_number ") + " partition_number 、
この
.I drive_number
冴れたドゃ垩сり、
.I partition_number
う:
.sp
パ若ｃ激с 0 ゃ
.br
パ若ｃ激с 1 〜 4 は DOS の "堺 (primary)" パ若ｃ激с
.br
パ若ｃ激с 5 〜 8 は DOS の "≦宍 (extended)" (障"茫理
(logical)") パ若ｃ激с潟

箴え違
.I /dev/sda
＜吾ｃ若潟ー 8 マゃ若潟ー 0 を持＜激鴻ム初の SCSI
ドゃを参сる。そし
.I /dev/sdb3
＜吾ｃ若潟ー 8 マゃ若潟ー 19 を持＜激鴻ムょ
SCSI ドゃ DOS "堺" パ若ｃ激с潟参сる。

憜ブバゃ鴻けが提箴される。若祉バゃ (raw device)
障絎茖され。
.SH 茯
罨＜
.I ioctl
が提箴される:
.TP
.B HDIO_GETGEO
.RS
罨＜う造篏をて BIOS ｃ鴻＜若帥菴す:
.in +4n
.nf

struct hd_geometry {
    unsigned char  heads;
    unsigned char  sectors;
    unsigned short cylinders;
    unsigned long  start;
};
.fi
.in

こ造篏吾ゃ潟帥
.BR ioctl (2)
吾＜若帥検される。

こ＜若帥ャられされる情宴
.I "DOS ｃ茹ｃれるような"
ドゃ吾＜сる。
こ吾＜ドゃ的吾＜リ
.I с。
こ宴ゃ若ｃ激с潟若篏成する時られる、
障、
.BR fdisk (1),
.BR efdisk (1),
.BR lilo (1)
篏荀сる。
もし、吾＜宴緇られれ違それぞれゅ若ャ
られされる。
.RE
.TP
.B BLKGETSIZE
祉帥違ц；したデバゃ鴻泣ゃ冴菴される。
.BR ioctl (2)
＜若帥
.I long
吾ゃ潟帥сれ違。
.TP
.B BLKRRPART
綣桁句SCSI デｃ鴻若ｃ激с潟若茯粋昭帥茵う。
パ＜若帥荀。

.BR scsi (4)
の
.BR ioctl (2)
操篏も同罕泣若される。
.BR ioctl (2)
＜若帥綽荀сそれが NULL 違
.BR ioctl (2)

.B EINVAL
уけ敗する。
.SH フ＜ゃ
/dev/sd[a\-h]: ドゃ
.br
/dev/sd[a\-h][0\-8]: 個々若ｃ激с
.\" .SH ∫ｉ目
.\" .BR scsi (4)
